California State University, Los Angeles (Cal State LA) is a public university in Los Angeles, California. It is part of the 23-campus California State University (CSU) system. Cal State LA offers 129 bachelor's degrees, 112 master's degrees, and four doctoral degrees: a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D) in special education in collaboration with the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), a Doctor of Education (Ed.D) in Educational Leadership, a Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) and a Doctor of Audiology (AuD). It also offers 22 teaching credentials.In Fall 2018 Cal State LA was the 5th most applied-to CSU campus for incoming freshmen and had the 5th lowest admit rate. Cal State LA has a student body of 26,361 as of fall 2019, with undergraduates numbering 22,626, primarily from the greater Los Angeles area, as well as 245,000 alumni. Cal State LA operates on the semester system with two semesters, each 15 weeks in duration per year: in the fall of 2016, the university changed to the semester system as part of a system-wide conversion of all quarter campuses. Cal State LA is organized into nine colleges that house a total of four schools and approximately 50 academic departments, divisions and interdisciplinary programs offering a variety of majors. The Early Entrance Program (EEP) in the Honors College for gifted students as young as 11 is the only one of its kind in the United States in promoting a direct transitional scheme from middle and high school to college without intermediary remedial education. Cal State LA is a Hispanic-serving institution.

The 175-acre (71 ha) hilltop campus core is home to the nation's first Charter College of Education, a NASA-funded SPACE program, Rockefeller-supported humanities center, and a National Science Foundation-funded environmental research center. Cal State LA is home to the critically acclaimed Luckman Jazz-Orchestra.
It is also home to two high schools: the Marc and Eva Stern Math and Science School and the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts (LACHSA), the only arts high school in Los Angeles that allows students from any district within Los Angeles County to attend.