California State University, Northridge (CSUN  or Cal State Northridge) is a public university in the Northridge neighborhood of Los Angeles, California. With a total enrollment of 38,391 students (as of Fall 2019), it has the largest undergraduate population as well as the second largest total student body of the 23-campus California State University system, making it one of the largest comprehensive universities in the United States in terms of enrollment size. The size of CSUN also has a major impact on the California economy, with an estimated $1.9 billion in economic output generated by CSUN on a yearly basis. As of Fall 2019, the university had 2,139 faculty, of which 805 (or about 40%) were tenured or on the tenure track.California State University, Northridge was founded first as the Valley satellite campus of California State University, Los Angeles. It then became an independent college in 1958 as San Fernando Valley State College, with major campus master planning and construction. The university adopted its current name of California State University, Northridge in 1972. The 1994 Northridge earthquake caused $400 million in damage to the campus, the heaviest damage ever sustained by an American college campus.The university offers 134 different bachelor's degrees and master's degree programs in 70 different fields, as well as four doctoral degrees (two Doctor of Education degrees, a Doctor of Audiology, and a Doctor of Physical Therapy) and 24 teaching credentials. It is classified among "Master's Colleges & Universities: Larger Programs".CSUN is considered to be one of the most diverse universities in the nation and currently has over 350,000 alumni. Additionally, CSUN has been consistently recognized as having one of the best film schools as well as music schools in the U.S. and in the world.
It is also home to the National Center on Deafness and the university hosts the annual International Conference on Technology and Persons with Disabilities, more commonly known as the CSUN Conference. Its business school, the David Nazarian College of Business and Economics, is one of largest business schools in the nation.