Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) is a private research university in Cleveland, Ohio. It was created in 1967 through the federation of two longstanding contiguous institutions: Western Reserve University, founded in 1826 and named for its location in the Connecticut Western Reserve, and Case Institute of Technology, founded in 1880 through the endowment of Leonard Case, Jr. Time magazine described the merger as the creation of "Cleveland's Big-Leaguer" university.Seventeen Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Case Western Reserve or one of its two predecessors. In U.S. News & World Report's 2020 rankings, Case Western Reserve was ranked as tied for 40th among national universities and 155th among global universities. The 2020 edition of The Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education (WSJ/THE) rankings ranked Case Western Reserve as 52nd among US colleges and universities.The campus is approximately 5 miles (8 km) east of Downtown Cleveland in the neighborhood known as University Circle, an area encompassing 550 acres (220 ha) containing a concentration of educational, medical, and cultural institutions. Case Western Reserve has a number of programs taught in conjunction with University Circle institutions, including the Cleveland Clinic, the University Hospitals of Cleveland, the Louis Stokes Cleveland Department of Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland Institute of Music, the Cleveland Hearing & Speech Center, the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Cleveland Institute of Art, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and the Cleveland Play House. Severance Hall, home of the Cleveland Orchestra, is on the Case Western Reserve campus.
Case Western Reserve includes the medical school, business school, dental school, law school, Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing (named for former U.S. Representative Frances P. Bolton), Department of Biomedical Engineering and its biomedical teaching and research capabilities. Case Western Reserve is a member of the Association of American Universities. Case is noted (among other fields) for research in electrochemistry and electrochemical engineering.
The Michelson–Morley interferometer experiment was conducted in 1887 in the basement of a campus dormitory by Albert A. Michelson of Case School of Applied Science and Edward W. Morley of Western Reserve University. This experiment proved the non-existence of the luminiferous ether and was later understood as evidence in support of special relativity as proposed by Albert Einstein in 1905. Michelson became the first American to win a Nobel Prize in science. The commemorative Michelson-Morley Memorial Fountain as well as an Ohio Historical Marker are located on campus, near where the actual experiment was performed.