City, University of London (abbreviated CUL) is a public research university in London, United Kingdom. It has been a constituent college of the University of London since 2016. It was founded in 1894 as the Northampton Institute, and became a university when The City University was created by royal charter in 1966. The Inns of Court School of Law, which merged with City in 2001, was established in 1852, making it the University's oldest constituent part. City joined the federal University of London on 1 September 2016, becoming part of the eighteen colleges and ten research institutes that make up that university.City has strong links with the City of London, and the Lord Mayor of London serves as the university's rector. The university has its main campus in Central London in the London Borough of Islington, with additional campuses in Islington, the City, the West End and East End. The annual income of the institution for 2016–17 was £227.0 million, of which £11.6 million was from research grants and contracts, with an expenditure of £221.4 million. It is organised into five schools, within which there are around forty academic departments and centres, including the Department of Journalism, the Cass Business School, and City Law School which incorporates the Inns of Court School of Law.City is ranked as the 351st best university worldwide by the QS World University Rankings 2020. The Cass Business School is ranked 5th in the UK, and in the top 40 in the world, in the Financial Times' 2017 Global MBA Rankings. City is a founding member of the WC2 University Network which developed for collaboration between leading universities of the heart of major world cities particularly to address cultural, environmental and political issues of common interest to world cities and their universities. The university is a member of the Association of MBAs, EQUIS and Universities UK.
Alumni of City include a Founding Father, members of Parliament of the United Kingdom, Prime Minister's of the United Kingdom, governors, politicians and CEO's.