Mathias Bröckers is a writer, journalist and longtime editor of the Berlin newspaper 'taz' (die tageszeitung). He is most widely known for his writings casting doubt on the commonly accepted version of events regarding the destruction of the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001.
He first wrote on the matter in the September 13, 2001, edition of the online magazine Telepolis and has subsequently published two books on 9/11: Verschwörungen, Verschwörungstheorien und die Geheimnisse des 11.9 was, under the title 'Conspiracies, Conspiracy Theories and the Secrets of 9/11, the only book promoting a 9/11 conspiracy theories to be translated into English from German. Its sequel was entitled Fakten, Fälschungen und die unterdrückten Beweise des 11.9, (Facts, Forgeries and the Suppressed Evidence of 9/11).
Bröckers stated that the unanimous opinion expressed by the media that Bin Laden was responsible made him suspicious: "Although it was the biggest police investigation of all time... one year after the attacks the amount of evidence gathered against those who allegedly masterminded them, Osama Bin Laden and his terrorist group Al Qaeda, comes to no more than it did only a few hours afterwards: virtually nothing." Bröckers does not accept that Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden planned and executed the 9/11 attacks.Bröckers is a longstanding writer on  conspiracy theories who was working on a book on conspiracy theories before the 9/11 attacks. As an admirer and translator of the work of novelist Robert Anton Wilson, co-author of The Illuminatus! Trilogy, Bröckers was working a book on a "new science of conspirology" in Sept. 2001, which led to his work on 9/11. His proposed scheme of thought would include "a general theory of conspiracy theories" as a guide to assessing their validity, instead of "blindly demonizing" them. This proposed book does not appear to have been published.  He assigns conspiracy a key role in history and biology as a powerful hybrid of the forces of competition and co-operation.Bröckers is also a long-time activist and author advocating the legalization of hemp. In 1993 he co-authored the influential Die Wiederentdeckung der Nutzpflanze Hanf (The Rediscovery of the Agricultural Crop Hemp) with Jack Herer. His Albert Hofmann und die Entdeckung des LSD (the Discovery of LSD) was published in Jan. 2006. He has spoken at conferences promoting the use of LSD.