Philip Frederick Anschutz ( AN-shoots; born December 28, 1939) is an American billionaire businessman who owns or controls many companies in a variety of businesses, including energy, railroads, real estate, sports, newspapers, movies, theaters, arenas and music. His name appears on medical and educational institutions to which he has donated millions. Anschutz has been described as a Christian conservative, who has donated to openly antigay, anti-transgender, and anti-abortion causes.
Anschutz was born to Fred and Marian Pfister Anschutz, whose memorial donations established the Anschutz Family Foundation, which has distributed over $50 million to various charitable causes, headed by Philip's sister the conservationist Sue Anschutz-Rodgers. He is also a frequent donor to groups that promote climate change denial and Christian viewpoints such as Intelligent Design.
In 1961, he bought out his father's oil drilling company, Circle A Drilling, and earned large returns in Wyoming. He invested in stocks, real estate and railroads. He expanded his investments to sports and entertainment companies, co-founding the American association football/soccer league Major League Soccer as well as multiple soccer teams, including the Los Angeles Galaxy, Chicago Fire, Houston Dynamo, San Jose Earthquakes, and the New York/New Jersey MetroStars. Anschutz is the principal owner of the National Hockey League's Los Angeles Kings and is a minority owner of the National Basketball Association's Los Angeles Lakers. He also owns stakes in performance venues that include the Staples Center, The O2, London, and the Dignity Health Sports Park. Through his ownership of Walden Media, he has invested in films such as The Chronicles of Narnia, Ray, and Joshua. Through the AEG Live, he owns the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. He is also the namesake of CU Anschutz, the medical campus of the University of Colorado.
As of October 2019, Forbes ranked him the 41st richest person in the U.S., with an estimated net worth of $11.5 billion.