Jonathan David Good (born December 7, 1985) is an American professional wrestler and actor, better known by his ring name Jon Moxley. He is currently signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW), where he is the current AEW World Champion in his first reign, and New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW), where he is the current IWGP United States Champion in his second reign. He also makes occasional appearances on the independent circuit. He is well known for tenure with WWE, where he performed under the ring name Dean Ambrose from 2011 to 2019.Good began his professional wrestling career under the Jon Moxley name on the American independent circuit in 2004, working for various regional promotions including Full Impact Pro (FIP), Combat Zone Wrestling (CZW), and Dragon Gate USA (DGUSA). He won several top championships, including the FIP World Heavyweight Championship once, the HWA Heavyweight Championship thrice, and the CZW World Heavyweight Championship twice.
After signing with WWE in 2011, he took the name Dean Ambrose and competed in their developmental territories Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW) and NXT. He joined the main roster in November 2012 as a member of The Shield, alongside Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins. In May 2013, Ambrose won his first championship in WWE, the United States Championship, while in the group, with his 351-day reign being the longest under the WWE banner. Following The Shield's breakup in June 2014, Ambrose went on to become a one-time WWE Champion, a three-time Intercontinental Champion, and a two-time Raw Tag Team Champion (with Seth Rollins). He was also the 2016 Money in the Bank ladder match winner. Upon winning the Raw Tag Team Championship in August 2017, Ambrose became WWE's 27th Triple Crown Champion and its 16th Grand Slam Champion.
Following his departure from WWE in 2019, Good reverted back to his Jon Moxley moniker and made an unannounced appearance at AEW's premiere event, Double or Nothing. He also started working in NJPW shortly after his WWE exit and won the IWGP United States Championship in his debut, becoming the first and only wrestler to have held the WWE and IWGP United States championships.
Outside of wrestling, Good made his acting debut as the star of the 2015 action film 12 Rounds 3: Lockdown and will appear in the upcoming action film Cagefighter: Worlds Collide.