Avatar: The Last Airbender (Avatar: The Legend of Aang in some regions) is an American animated television series created by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko, with Aaron Ehasz as head writer. It aired on Nickelodeon for three seasons, from February 2005 to July 2008. Avatar is set in an Asiatic-like world in which some people can manipulate the classical elements with psychokinetic variants of the Chinese martial arts known as "bending"; one individual, the Avatar, is capable of bending all four elements and is responsible for maintaining harmony between the world's four nations. It is presented in a style that combines anime with American cartoons and relies on the imagery of East/South Asian, Inuit, and New World societies.
The series is centered around the journey of 12-year-old Aang, the Avatar and last survivor of his nation, the Air Nomads, along with his friends Sokka, Katara, and later on Toph, as they strive to end the Fire Nation's war against the other nations of the world. It also follows the story of Zuko—an exiled prince of the Fire Nation seeking to restore his lost honor by capturing Aang, accompanied by his wise uncle Iroh—and later that of his ambitious sister Azula.
Avatar was commercially successful and was acclaimed by audiences and critics, who praised its art direction, soundtrack, cultural references, humor, characters, and themes. These include concepts rarely touched on in youth entertainment, such as genocide, totalitarianism and free choice. It was nominated for—and won—five Annie Awards, a Genesis Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a Kids' Choice Award and a Peabody Award. As of April 2020, Avatar has a critics score of 100% on Rotten Tomatoes.The extended Avatar franchise includes an ongoing comics series, an animated sequel series, a live-action film, and an upcoming live-action remake of the series by its original creators to be produced for Netflix. The complete series was released on Blu-ray in June 2018 for the 10th anniversary of the show's finale.