Stephen Patrick Glanvill Henighan (born 19 June 1960) is a Canadian novelist, short story writer, journalist and academic.
Born in Hamburg, Germany, Henighan arrived in Canada at the age of five and grew up in rural eastern Ontario. He studied political science at Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania, where he won the Potter Short Story Prize in April 1981. From 1984 to 1992 he lived in Montreal as a freelance writer and completed an M.A. at Concordia University. Between 1992 and 1996 he earned a doctorate in Spanish American literature at Wadham College, Oxford.  While at Oxford, Henighan became the first writer to have stories published in three different editions of the annual May Anthology of Oxford and Cambridge Short Stories.  He also studied in Colombia, Romania and Germany. From 1996 to 1998 Henighan taught Latin American literature at Queen Mary & Westfield College, University of London. Since 1999 he has taught at the University of Guelph, Ontario.Henighan has published five novels. His short stories have been published in Canada, the U.S., Great Britain and, in translation, in Europe. Henighan's novels and stories feature immigrants, travellers and other displaced people caught between cultures. According to the journal Canadian Literature, Henighan is "a writer who looks hard at the complexities and rebarbative elements of the multicultural, globalized world we live in."Henighan's journalism has appeared in The Times Literary Supplement, The Walrus, Geist, The Globe and Mail, Toronto Life, Adbusters and the Montreal Gazette. He has been a finalist for the Governor General's Award, and the Canada Prize in the Humanities.In 2006 Henighan set off a controversy when he attacked the Giller Prize. As an academic, he has published articles on  Latin American literature and Lusophone African fiction, a book on the Nobel Prize-winning Guatemalan novelist  Miguel Ángel Asturias and a 776-page study of the analysis of the history of Nicaragua presented in the work of Ernesto Cardenal and Sergio Ramirez. Henighan has published translations from Spanish, Portuguese and Romanian, including Angolan writer Ondjaki, Nicaraguan poet Carlos Rigby, and the Romanian writer Mihail Sebastian, and is general editor of a translation series run by Biblioasis, a literary publisher based in Windsor, Ontario. Writers recruited by Henighan for the Biblioasis International Translation Series include Horacio Castellanos Moya, Mia Couto, Liliana Heker and Emili Teixidor.

