Princess Nukata (額田王, Nukata no Ōkimi, c. 630–690 CE) (also known as Princess Nukada) was a Japanese poet of the Asuka period.
The daughter of Prince Kagami and supposed younger sister of Princess Kagami, Nukata became Emperor Tenmu's favorite wife and bore him a daughter, Princess Tōchi (who would become Emperor Kōbun's consort).  A legend claims that she later became consort to Emperor Tenji, Emperor Tenmu's elder brother, but there is no evidence to support this claim. 
Nukata was one of the great female poets of her time; thirteen of her poems appear in the Man'yōshū: Nos. 7–9, 16–18, 20, 112, 113, 151, 155, 488, and 1606. (No. 1606 is a repeat of No. 488.) Two of the poems are reprinted in the later poetry collections Shinchokusen Wakashū and Shinshūi Wakashū. 
Poem No. 9 is known as one of the most difficult poems within the Man'yōshū to interpret.
The first two lines of the poem has already defeated modern scholarship to date. Some theories include:

木綿取りし　祝鎮むる (Yūtori shi, iwaishizumuru...), Kaoru Tani紀の国の　山越えて行け (Ki-no-kuni no yama koete yuke...), Kada no Azumamaro
三室の　山見つつ行け (Mimuro-no-yama mitsutsu yuke...), Mokichi Saitō
三諸の　山見つつ行け (Mimoro-no-yama mitsutsu yuke...), Kamochi Masazumi
み吉野の　山見つつ行け (Miyoshino no yama mitsutsu yuke...), Tokujirō Oyama香具山の　国見さやけみ (Kaguyama no kuni misayakemi...), Kaneko
坂鳥の　掩ふな朝雪 (Sakatori no ōuna asayuki...) Teiichi Kumekawa
静まりし　浦波さわく (Shizumarishi uranami sawaku...), Hisataka Omodaka
静まりし　大夫ら佇ち (Shizumarishi taburatsumadachi...), Mineko Kawaguchi
静まりし　雷な鳴りそね (Shizumarishi raina narisone...), Toshihiko Tsuchihashi
和まりし　相会ふそあけ (Nagomarishi aiau soake...)
勾の　田蘆見つつ行け (Magari no tabushi mitsutsuyuke...), Bunmei Tsuchiya
まつち山　見つつこそ行け (Matsuchi-yama mitsutsu kosoyuke...), Inoue Michiyasu
夕月の　光踏みて立て (Yūzuki no kage fumite tate...), Sueo Itami
夕月の　仰ぎて問ひし (Yūzuki no aogite toishi...), Sengaku, Kimura Masakoto
夕月し　覆ひなせそ雲 (Yūzuki shi ōinaseso kumo...), KeitsūAccording to Alexander Vovin the first two lines should be read in Old Korean, whereby their meaning is similar to the one proposed by Sengaku.