Port Elizabeth or Nelson Mandela Bay (Xhosa: iBhayi; Afrikaans: Die Baai [di ˈbɑːi]) often known by its initials PE, and colloquially as “The Friendly City”, is a major seaport city and most populous city in the Eastern Cape province of South Africa.  Port Elizabeth is the seat of the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality, South Africa's second largest metropolitan  district by area.  It is the most-populous city of the Eastern Cape and the sixth most-populous city in South Africa. the most-populous city of Eastern Cape; and the cultural, economic and financial center of the Eastern Cape.  The city is among the top five cities in the world for pleasant weather, according to a 2014 scientific climate study of 600 global cities.  Port Elizabeth is known for many blue-flag beaches along the city's urban coastline; its popularity as an international and local holiday destination; and its rich and diverse cultural heritage.  It is a tourism gateway city for the Eastern Cape and the only city with the closest proximity to malaria-free big five game reserves. The economy of Port Elizabeth is primarily oriented towards automotive assembly, manufacturing and export industries, and the city is also a major South African and sub-Saharan African destination for investment. Foreign direct investments of $19,8 billion has been secured over the past decade. Several Fortune 500 companies have a presence or their African operations headquartered in Port Elizabeth. The city's most prominent landmarks are Shark Rock pier, the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium, and the Donkin Reserve.
Port Elizabeth is a popular domestic and international holiday destination.  It is a gateway city for Eastern Cape's adventure, outdoor and African big five game, malaria-free safari tourism.Port Elizabeth is located in the south eastern coast of South Africa.  It is situated on the western portion of Algoa Bay, adjacent to the Indian Ocean.  The city lies 770 km east of Cape Town, between South Africa's Garden Route and Wild Coast.  Port Elizabeth covers 251 square kilometers of the Nelson Mandela Bay metropolitan area, South Africa's sixth largest metropolitan municipality.  Fortune 500 companies are present or have their African operations headquartered in the city.  Port Elizabeth is the second oldest city in South Africa.  It was founded in 1820 by the government of the Cape Colony when 4,000 British colonists settled Algoa Bay to strengthen the border region between the Cape Colony and the Xhosa.The city's moderate subtropical climate ranks among the top ten cities in the world for highly pleasant, all year round weather, according to a Syracuse University climatology study.Port Elizabeth is a popular tourist holiday destination. Shark Rock Pier, a prominent installation on the shoreline of Port Elizabeth's Summerstrand precinct, is the city's most famous landmark.  Port Elizabeth is a tourism gateway city for big five game viewing,  South Africa's national's arts festival, outdoor recreation, adventure tourism and numerous nature conservancies, including the Baviaanskloof mega-reserve, Port Elizabeth was one of the host cities for the official tournament of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.