Sciences Po Bordeaux, or Institut d'études politiques (IEP) de Bordeaux, is a French political science grande école located on the university campus of Pessac, 8 km from the centre of Bordeaux. It is attached to the University of Bordeaux. Established in 1948, Sciences Po Bordeaux is one of the ten Institutes of Political Studies of France and a Grandes école.
All students in Sciences Po Bordeaux study a curriculum that is highly practical and broad based, focusing on the full range of the social sciences: law, economics, finance, management, etc. The school is considered as one of the most selective in France, mainly because it is one of the schools where main political and business leaders are born.According to article 2 of an 18 December 1989 decree, the mission of Institutes of Political Studies is : 1° to contribute to the training of higher civil servants as well as executives in the public, para-public and private sectors, notably in the State and decentralized communities 2° to develop the research in political and administrative sciences
Alumni include many notable public figures, including one French Prime Minister, politicians and influential businessmen.
The Institute has approximately 1,300 students, admitted after a rigorous selection. Each year, Sciences Po Bordeaux receives about 3000 applications and only around 150 students will be accepted after the selection process, around 5% in average. This process makes it one of the most difficult French Political Institute to be accepted in.The academic course lasts five years, at the end of which a student graduates with the Diploma of Sciences Po Bordeaux (which is equivalent to a bachelor's degree) and with one of three Masters offered by the Institute.
Sciences Po Bordeaux is a well integrated university, with more than 200 exchange-agreements with foreign universities around the world. It also proposes double degree programs with the universities of Stuttgart (Germany), Turin (Italy), Coimbra (Portugal), Madrid (Spain), Cardiff (UK), Moscow (Russia), Kingston (Jamaica) and Quebec (Canada).