Miami International Airport (IATA: MIA, ICAO: KMIA, FAA LID: MIA), also known as MIA and historically as Wilcox Field, is the primary airport serving the Miami area, Florida, United States, with over 1,000 daily flights to 167 domestic and international destinations, and one of three airports serving this area. The airport is in an unincorporated area in Miami-Dade County, 8 miles (13 km) northwest of Downtown Miami, in metropolitan Miami, adjacent to the cities of Miami and Miami Springs, and the village of Virginia Gardens.  Nearby are the cities of Hialeah and Doral, and the Census-designated place of Fontainebleau.
It is South Florida's main airport for long-haul international flights and a hub for the Southeastern United States, with passenger and cargo flights to cities throughout the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Western Asia, as well as cargo flights to East Asia. It is the largest gateway between the United States and south to Latin America, and is one of the largest airline hubs in the United States, owing to its proximity to tourist attractions, local economic growth, large local Latin American and European populations, and strategic location to handle connecting traffic between North America, Latin America, and Europe.
In 2018, 45,044,312 passengers traveled through the airport, making it the 13th busiest airport in the United States and 40th busiest in the world by total passenger traffic. In 2019, MIA served 45,924,466 passengers, a passenger record for the airport. It is the 3rd busiest airport in the United States by international passenger traffic. MIA is Florida's busiest airport by total aircraft operations and total cargo traffic and its second busiest by total passenger traffic after Orlando International Airport.The airport is American Airlines' third largest hub and serves as its primary gateway to Latin America. Miami also serves as a focus city for Avianca, Frontier Airlines, and LATAM, both for passengers and cargo operations. In the past, it has been a hub for Braniff International Airways, Eastern Air Lines, Air Florida, the original National Airlines, the original Pan American World Airways ("Pan Am"), United Airlines, Iberia Airlines and Fine Air.

