I Am... World Tour is the fourth live and the fifth video album by American singer Beyoncé. It was released on November 26, 2010 through Parkwood Entertainment, Music World Entertainment and Columbia Records. Beyoncé produced, directed and edited the concert film for her own production company Parkwood Pictures. It was filmed in the presence of more than a million fans during her worldwide I Am... World Tour, running from March 2009 through February 2010, in support of her third studio album, I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008). The DVD on the album is a combination of performances from the tour, including guest appearances from Jay-Z and Kanye West, as well as backstage moments. Beyoncé explained that the idea of filming her worldwide performances came when she realized that she was feeling lonely. She edited the film for nine months and it serves as her directorial debut.
I Am... World Tour was released in three separate editions – standard, deluxe and Blu-ray. In the United States, the standard edition was made available exclusively at Walmart on November 26, 2010. The deluxe edition was released in several countries around the world on the same date. The Blu-ray edition was released from December 3, 2010 in a list of selected countries only. Beyoncé promoted the album by appearing on several shows, including ABC's Nightline and by holding a screening of the film in New York City, in presence of several fans and artists on November 21, 2010. Prior to the release, numerous trailers were posted on Beyoncé's official website. I Am... World Tour premiered exclusively on ABC on November 25, 2010 as a ninety-minute Thanksgiving special.
Upon the release of I Am... World Tour, it received mixed to positive reviews from music critics who generally praised the high-energy performances of the songs as well as Beyoncé's vocals. I Am... World Tour debuted at number one on the US Top Music Videos, giving Beyoncé her second consecutive and third non-consecutive number-one DVD in the United States. It was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album was also successful worldwide, peaking within the top ten on the DVD charts in every country after its release. It became the best-selling video album worldwide of 2010 and seventh of 2011. I Am... World Tour was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards (2012).