Schaerbeek  (obsolete Dutch spelling, retained in French, pronounced [skaʁbek] (listen)) or Schaarbeek (Dutch, pronounced [ˈsxaːrbeːk] (listen)) is one of the nineteen municipalities located in the Brussels-Capital Region of Belgium. It is bordered by the City of Brussels, Etterbeek, Evere and Saint-Josse-ten-Noode. In common with all the Brussels municipalities, it is legally bilingual (French–Dutch).
The eastern part of Schaerbeek (the area that includes Vergote Square, Boulevard Lambermont, Quartier des Fleurs, Jamblinne de Meux Square, and Diamant Quarters and Josaphat Park) is nowadays a location selected by affluent people for its architecture and its convenient location (close to the EU institutions and the financial heart of the city, NATO, the  European School, the airport and the "Ring" and highways). Young couples are also favouring this suburb for its "Notting Hill" atmosphere and the still reasonable pricing of real estate, while prices are on the surge as everywhere else in Brussels.
This gentrification phenomenon is gradually spreading from the perimeter of the Josaphat Park, concentrically, to the surrounding streets, where artisan bakeries, delicatessens and other cheese shops or table d'hôtes have settled, the Josaphat Park, classified as the most beautiful Park in Brussels according to an RTBF consultation, clearly acting as a catalyst.
The western part of Schaerbeek (the area near the Brussels-North railway station, the Chaussée de Haecht/Haachtsesteenweg and the Van Praet bridge) is home to a large Turkish immigrant community, a significant part of which originates from Afyon or Emirdağ, Turkey. It is also home to a large Moroccan population and other immigrant communities such as Spanish, Congolese, and Asian immigrants. The area around St. Mary's Royal Church is the part where the Turkish community gathers in Brussels, which has led the area to be dubbed "Petite Anatolie" because of all the Turkish restaurants and shops at the Chaussée de Haecht/Haachtsesteenweg. However, because of the numerous schools like the Hogeschool Sint-Lukas Brussel, the administrations and the proximity of the Rue Royale there is a social mix.
The Schaerbeek Cemetery, despite its name, is actually in the neighbouring municipality of Evere.