The Freedom Party of Austria (German: Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs, FPÖ) is a right-wing populist, national-conservative political party in Austria. The party, led by Norbert Hofer since September 2019, is a member of the Identity and Democracy group in the European Parliament, as well as of the Identity and Democracy Party.
The FPÖ was founded in 1956 as the successor to the short-lived Federation of Independents (VdU), representing the "Third Camp" of Austrian politics, i.e. pan-Germanists and national liberals opposed to both socialism and Catholic clericalism. The party's first leader was Anton Reinthaller, a former Nazi functionary and SS officer. The FPÖ, a third party with modest support, was admitted to the Liberal International (LI) in 1979 and participated in a government led by the Social Democratic Party (SPÖ), following the 1983 legislative election. When Jörg Haider was chosen as new FPÖ leader in 1986, the party started an ideological turn towards right-wing populism. This new political course soon resulted in a strong surge in electoral support, although it also led the SPÖ to break ties. In 1993, after a controversial proposal on immigration issues, the adherents of a position closer to classical liberalism broke away from the FPÖ and formed the Liberal Forum (LiF), which took over the FPÖ's membership in the LI (since the FPÖ considered itself forced to leave) and would later eventually merge into NEOS. Among other things, the party supports the unification of South Tyrol (Italy) with Tyrol (Austria) and therefore the South Tyrolean secessionist movement, which notably includes its South Tyrolean sister party Die Freiheitlichen.
In the 1999 legislative election the FPÖ placed second and won 26.9% of the vote, its best-ever result in a nationwide election, and for the first time came ahead of the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) by a small margin. The FPÖ eventually reached a coalition agreement with the ÖVP in 2000, but ceded the chancellorship to the ÖVP to appease international opinion. The FPÖ soon became uncomfortable with governing and fell sharply in the 2002 legislative election, in which it obtained only 10% of the vote; however, the two parties agreed to continue their coalition following the election. In 2005 increasing internal disagreements in the FPÖ led Haider and several leading members (including all the party's ministers) to defect and form the Alliance for the Future of Austria (BZÖ), which replaced the FPÖ as government partner.
Under the leadership of Heinz-Christian Strache (2005–2019), the party gradually re-gained and increased popular support. In the 2013 legislative election the FPÖ won 20.5% of the vote and, more recently, it came ahead either of the SPÖ or the ÖVP in some state elections, entered in an SPÖ-led government in Burgenland and gained more than 30% of the vote in Vienna. Finally, in the 2016 presidential election, FPÖ member Norbert Hofer won the first round, receiving 35.1%, but was defeated by The Greens' candidate Alexander Van der Bellen, 53.8% against 46.2%, in the final run-off (an earlier run-off was invalidated).
In the nationwide legislative snap elections in October 2017, the FPÖ won 26% of the vote, a narrow third place, and entered the coalition government as a junior partner, with the ÖVP leader, Sebastian Kurz, as Chancellor. The Ibiza affair that broke out on 17 May 2019 has led Strache to tender his resignation the next day as both Vice-Chancellor and party leader, which in turn led to the collapse of the coalition with the ÖVP, and subsequent new elections.  The scandal was triggered by video of a July 2017 meeting in Ibiza, Spain, published on 17 May 2019, appearing to show Strache and Gudenus discussing underhanded political practices. In the video, both politicians appeared receptive to proposals by a woman posing as the niece of a Russian oligarch, discussing providing the FPÖ positive news coverage in return for business contracts. Strache and Gudenus also hinted at corrupt political practices involving other wealthy donors to the FPÖ elsewhere.
In a snap election held on 29 September 2019, the Freedom Party won 16 percent of the vote. The results represent a loss of about one-third of the party's seats in parliament.