Federal University of Minas Gerais (Portuguese: Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, UFMG) is a federal university located in Belo Horizonte, state of Minas Gerais, Brazil. UFMG is one of Brazil's five largest universities, being the largest federal university. It offers 75 undergraduate degrees, including a  Medicine degree, Law and Economics, plus Engineering and Science and Art degrees. It offers 57 PhD programs, 66 MSc programs, 79 Post-Baccalaureate programs and 41 medical residency programs. UFMG has a population of 49,254 students.
The university also has campuses in Tiradentes and Montes Claros. Most courses, however, are taught at the main campus, located in the Pampulha neighborhood of Belo Horizonte. It receives the second highest amount of federal resources among other federal universities and registered over 1060 national and international patents in 2016, the biggest amount among other Brazilian higher education institutions. In 2014, according to Scopus, UFMG published over three thousand articles in influential international newspapers and magazines. In addition, 784 of their teachers are researchers for Brazil's National Council for Scientific and Technological Development.Past students include former Brazilian presidents Dilma Rousseff, Juscelino Kubitschek and Tancredo Neves; former Governor of Minas Gerais Rondon Pacheco; writer, medical doctor and diplomat João Guimarães Rosa, writers Fernando Sabino, Pedro Nava and Cyro dos Anjos; plastic surgeon Ivo Pitanguy, poet Carlos Drummond de Andrade and musicians Fernando Brant, Samuel Rosa of Skank and Fernanda Takai of Pato Fu.
The undergraduate students are admitted through the national annual exams called Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio (National High School Exam). Its undergraduate courses were ranked 1st place in the 2007 results of the Student's National Performance Exam (ENADE). UFMG is the ninth best university in Latin America, according to the 2019 Times Higher Education ranking.. In 2018, it was elected by Folha de S.Paulo as the 3rd best university in Brazil. UFMG's communication, psychology and management degrees, among others, were also elected as the best in the country and almost all undergraduate courses offered by the institution rank in the top 5 when compared to their counterparts in other Brazilian universities. Furthermore, the university is the highest ranking Brazilian university in terms of quality of education and second place when it comes to recognition in the job market.