Shinzo Abe (安倍 晋三, Abe Shinzō, IPA: [abe ɕin(d)zoː]; born 21 September 1954) is a Japanese politician who has been the Prime Minister of Japan since 2012. Abe is also currently the president of the conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). He previously served as Chief Cabinet Secretary from 2005 to 2006, and as prime minister from 2006 to 2007, making him the longest-serving prime minister in Japanese history, since the office was first created in 1885.
First elected to the House of Representatives in the 1993 election, he rose to be appointed chief cabinet secretary by Junichiro Koizumi, before replacing Koizumi as LDP president in September 2006. He was subsequently confirmed as prime minister by a special session of the National Diet, becoming, aged 52, Japan's youngest post-war prime minister, and the first to have been born after World War II. Abe resigned in September 2007, citing health reasons, shortly after his party lost the House of Councillors election that year. He was replaced by Yasuo Fukuda, the first in a series of five prime ministers who each failed to retain office for more than sixteen months.
After recovering from illness, Abe staged an unexpected political comeback, defeating former defense minister Shigeru Ishiba in a vote to become LDP president for a second time in September 2012. Following the LDP's landslide victory in the general election that December, he became the first former prime minister to return to the office since Shigeru Yoshida in 1948. He was later re-elected in similar landslides in the 2014 and 2017 elections.
Abe is a conservative whom political commentators have widely described as a right-wing nationalist. He is a member of Nippon Kaigi and holds revisionist views on Japanese history, including denying the role of government coercion in the recruitment of comfort women during World War II, a position which has created tension with neighboring South Korea. He is considered a hard-liner with respect to North Korea, and advocates revising Article 9 of the pacifist constitution to permit Japan to maintain military forces. Abe is known internationally for his government's economic policies, nicknamed Abenomics, which pursue monetary easing, fiscal stimulus, and structural reforms.

