West Bengal () is a state in the eastern region of India along the Bay of Bengal. With over 91 million inhabitants (as of 2011), it is India's fourth-most populous state. West Bengal is the thirteenth-largest Indian state, with an area of 88,752 km2 (34,267 sq mi). Part of the ethno-linguistic Bengal region of the Indian subcontinent, it borders Bangladesh in the east, and Nepal and Bhutan in the north. It also borders the Indian states of Odisha, Jharkhand, Bihar, Sikkim, and Assam. The state capital is Kolkata (Calcutta) the seventh-largest city in India, and center of the third-largest metropolitan area in the country. West Bengal includes the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region, the Ganges delta, the Rarh region, and the coastal Sundarbans. The main ethnic group is the Bengalis, with Bengali Hindus forming the demographic majority.
The area's early history featured a succession of Indian empires, internal squabbling, and a tussle between Hinduism and Buddhism for dominance. Ancient Bengal was the site of several major Janapadas (kingdoms), while the earliest cities date back to the Vedic period. The region was part of several ancient pan−Indian empires, including the Mauryans and Guptas. It was also a bastion of regional kingdoms. The citadel of Gauda served as the capital of the Gauda Kingdom, the Buddhist Pala Empire (8th–11th century) and Hindu Sena Empire (11th–12th century). Islam was introduced  through trade with the Abbasid Caliphate, but following the early conquest of Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji and the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate, it spread across the entire Bengal region. Later, occasional Muslim raiders reinforced the process of conversion by building mosques, madrasas, and khanqahs. During the Islamic Bengal Sultanate, founded in 1352, Bengal was a major trading nation in the world and was often referred by the Europeans as the richest country to trade with. It was absorbed into the Mughal Empire in 1576. Simultaneously, some parts of the region were ruled by several Hindu states, and Baro-Bhuyan landlords, and part of it was briefly overrun by the Suri Empire. The Mughal Bengal was heralded by Aurangzeb as the "paradise of the nations", since it was the empire's most economically developed province. It became a leading exporter to the world,  and a center of worldwide industries such as cotton textiles, silk, and shipbuilding. Its citizens' standard of living was among the world's highest. Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, for example, including more than 50% of its textiles and around 80% of its silks. Bengal's economy bypassed the period of proto-industrialization.By the 18th century, the state was ruled by the Nawabs of Bengal, before being conquered by the British East India Company at the Battle of Plassey in 1757. Calcutta served for many years as the capital of British India. The region was later administered by the United Kingdom as part of the Bengal Presidency (1757–1905; 1912–1947) and Eastern Bengal and Assam Province (1905–1912) in British India. Bengal faced multiple famines and deindustrialisation under British Raj. The region was a hotbed of the Indian independence movement and has remained one of India's great artistic and intellectual centre denoted by Bengali Renaissance. In 1947, the Bengal Legislative Council and the Bengal Legislative Assembly voted on the Partition of Bengal along religious lines into two separate entities: West Bengal, a state of India, and East Bengal, a province of Pakistan which later became the independent Bangladesh. Several regional and pan−Indian empires throughout Bengal's history have shaped its culture, cuisine, and architecture. 
Post independence, West Bengal's economy is based on agricultural production and small and medium-sized enterprises. The economy of West Bengal is the sixth-largest state economy in India with ₹11.77 lakh crore (US$170 billion) in gross domestic product and a per capita GDP of ₹116,000 (US$1,600). The state has high government debt with ₹3.6 lakh crore (US$50 billion) or 35% of GSDP, moderate unemployment, and low per capita income. In human development index it ranks 28th among Indian states. Kolkata is known as the "cultural capital of India". West Bengal has two World Heritage sites and one of the top tourism destinations in India.