The University of Victoria (commonly known as UVic) is a public research university located in the Greater Victoria municipalities of Oak Bay and Saanich, British Columbia, Canada. The university traces its roots to Victoria College, the first post-secondary institution established in British Columbia in 1903. It operated as an affiliated college until 1963 when it was reorganized into the present University of Victoria. UVic has ranked as the second best comprehensive university in Canada for three successive years.Its campus is situated 7 km north of Downtown Victoria and is spread over 403 acres. The university operates nine academic faculties and schools including the Peter B. Gustavson School of Business and the Faculties of Education, Engineering, Fine Arts, Human & Social Development, Humanities, Law, Science, and Social Sciences.
It is the nation's lead institution in the VENUS and NEPTUNE deep-water seafloor observatory projects. The university also hosts and leads the Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions (PICS) and is home to two Environment Canada labs: the Canadian Center for Climate Modelling and Analysis and the Water and Climate Impacts Research Centre. The Ocean Climate Building housed at the Queenswood location is solely dedicated to ocean and climate research. The Institute of Integrated Energy Systems is a leading center for research on sustainable energy solutions and alternative energy sources. The university is also home to Canada's first and only Indigenous Law degree program along with dedicated research centers for Indigenous and Environmental law.Based in the capital city of British Columbia, the university has educated many prominent legal and political leaders, including Jody Wilson-Raybould, Rona Ambrose, and Supreme Court Justice Russell Brown. In recent years, the university counts amongst its alumni the founders of several leading technology companies, including Flickr, Slack, and Hootsuite. The University of Victoria has also produced several Rhodes and Gates Scholars and its alumni and faculty have worked on Nobel Prize winning research teams. As of 2018, the university has been home to more than 40 Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada.