Tokyo (; Japanese: 東京, Tōkyō [toːkʲoː] (listen)), officially the Tokyo Metropolis (東京都, Tōkyō-to), is the capital of Japan and the most populous of its 47 prefectures. Located at the head of Tokyo Bay, the prefecture forms part of the Kantō region in the southeast of Japan's main island, Honshu. It is the center of the Greater Tokyo Area, the most populous metropolitan area in the world, as well as the seat of the Emperor of Japan and the national government. 
Originally a small fishing village named Edo (江戸), the city became a prominent political center under shōgun Tokugawa Ieyasu, who made the city his military headquarters in 1603. Following the end of the shogunate in 1868, the imperial capital was relocated from Kyoto to the city, which was renamed Tokyo (literally "eastern capital"). Since 1943, Tokyo has been governed as a unique "metropolis", combining elements of both a city and a prefecture; the Tokyo Metropolitan Government administers the 23 special wards, various bed towns in the western area, and two outlying island chains.
Tokyo is categorized as an Alpha+ city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. As of 2019, the population of Tokyo was estimated to be more than 13.9 million, making it Japan's most populous prefecture. The metropolitan area, which includes the neighboring prefectures of Kanagawa, Saitama, and Chiba, among others, is the world's most populous, at more than 38 million residents. As of 2019, Tokyo hosted 36 of the Fortune Global 500 companies. In 2020, it ranked third on the Global Financial Centres Index, behind only New York City and London.The city has hosted multiple international events, including the 1964 Summer Olympics and three G7 Summits (1979, 1986, and 1993); it will also host the 2020 Summer Olympics and Paralympics. Tokyo is a leading center for research and development, and is represented by various major universities, most notably the University of Tokyo. The city is a hub for the Japan's high-speed Shinkansen bullet train system, and is served by an extensive network of light rail and subways. The city is also a major cultural center of Japan, with attractions including Ueno Park, the Tokyo National Museum, and the Tokyo Imperial Palace.