Winner (Korean: 위너), stylized as WINNER, is a South Korean boy band consisting of four members: Jinwoo, Seunghoon, Mino and Seungyoon. The band was formed in 2013 by YG Entertainment through Mnet survival program WIN: Who Is Next leading to their official debut on August 17, 2014 with studio album 2014 S/S. Originally a five-piece band, Taehyun, departed from the group in November 2016 due to his mental health and well-being. Upon debut, The Korea Herald cited their immediate success as "unprecedented" for a new group, thus dubbed as "Monster rookies". The Korea Corporate Reputation Research Institute revealed the band was acquired to have one of the highest brand reputations in South Korea, listing among the top five while peaking at number three. The band also earned the title "Trust and Listen" given by the general public through releases.  
As of March 2019, Winner were recorded as the fastest Korean act to top Billboard World Album Chart with debut album 2014 S/S alongside topping domestic charts on Gaon for both their album and lead single "Empty". Winner is also currently the fastest act to win on a televised music show. Their success throughout Asia earned them numerous awards for music, fashion and popularity including the Melon Music Awards, MTV Asia Music Gala and Style Icon Awards. Following the bands reformation, Winner's lead single, "Really Really" from first single album Fate Number For (2017) instantly spawned to number one in South Korea. "Really Really" went on to selling over 2.5 million digital copies on Gaon and creating a record of surpassing 100 million streams on Gaon, making Winner the first-ever K-pop boy group in history to achieve this while keeping their "Chart-In" status.
Throughout their career, the band cumulatively held over 100 concerts, where their first world tour, Winner Everywhere Tour in 2018 marks the band's largest tour to date. Winner is also known through endorsement deals with brands Adidas, Oreo, Kiehl's and more. Winner's philanthropic acts were also brought to attention through constant donations to humanitarian organizations and collaborations with charities and animal campaigns.

