Keeping Up with the Kardashians (often abbreviated KUWTK) is an American reality television series that airs on the E! cable network. The show focuses on the personal and professional lives of the Kardashian–Jenner blended family. Its premise originated with Ryan Seacrest, who also serves as an executive producer. The series debuted on October 14, 2007, and has subsequently become one of the longest-running reality television series in the country. The eighteenth season premiered on March 26, 2020. Also, on February 27, Kris Jenner confirmed on the Ellen show that filming for season 19 has begun.
The series focuses mainly on sisters Kim, Kourtney, and Khloé and their half-sisters Kendall and Kylie. It also features their parents Kris and Caitlyn, and brother Rob. The significant others of the Kardashian sisters have also appeared on the show, including Kourtney's ex-boyfriend Scott Disick, Kim's ex-husband Kris Humphries, and current husband Kanye West, Khloé's ex-husband Lamar Odom, ex-boyfriend French Montana, and ex-boyfriend Tristan Thompson along with Rob's ex-girlfriend Adrienne Bailon and ex-fiancé Blac Chyna. Caitlyn's son Brody Jenner made a cameo in season 1, before appearing regularly between the 8th and 11th seasons, along with brother Brandon and Brandon's wife Leah. Kim's friend Jonathan Cheban and Khloé's friend Malika Haqq have also been part of the show.
Keeping Up with the Kardashians has been critically panned since its premiere. It is often criticized for the high degree of emphasis on the "famous for being famous" concept, and for appearing to fabricate some aspects of its storylines. Several critics also noted the show's lack of intelligence. However, some critics recognized the reality series as a "guilty pleasure" and acknowledged the family's success. Despite the negative reviews, Keeping Up with the Kardashians  has attracted high viewership ratings, becoming one of the network's most successful shows and winning several audience awards.
The series' success has led additionally to the creation of numerous spin-off series, including: Kourtney and Kim Take Miami, Kourtney and Kim Take New York, Khloé & Lamar, Kourtney and Khloé Take The Hamptons, Dash Dolls, Rob & Chyna, Life of Kylie, and Flip It Like Disick. The network has also broadcast several television specials featuring special events involving members of the family and friends.