Upper Canada College (UCC) in Toronto, Ontario is a private school for boys between Senior Kindergarten and Grade Twelve, operating under the International Baccalaureate program. The secondary school segment is divided into ten houses; eight are for day students and the remaining two are for boarding students. Aside from the main structure, with its dominant clock tower, the Toronto campus has a number of sports facilities, staff and faculty residences, and buildings for other purposes. UCC also owns and operates a campus in Norval, Ontario, for outdoor education.
UCC was founded in 1829 by Lieutenant Governor of Upper Canada Sir John Colborne, based upon Elizabeth College, Guernsey. It is the oldest independent school in the province of Ontario, the third oldest in Canada, and is widely described as the country's most prestigious preparatory school, having many of Canada's most powerful and wealthy as graduates. Modelled on the British public schools, UCC, throughout the first part of its history, both had an influence on and was influenced by provincial government. After facing closure by the government on more than one occasion, UCC became fully independent in 1900, nine years after moving to its present location. A major crisis befell UCC when, in 1959, the main structure at Deer Park was condemned and funds had to be quickly raised to build the Upper School that exists today.  Through the 1960s and '70s, campus culture changed: the cadet corps was disbanded, the curriculum shifted from classical to liberal arts, and the student population became more culturally diverse. The college struggled between 1998 and 2004 with allegations of sexual abuse of students by teachers during the 1970s and '80s, as well as a related class-action lawsuit; one former teacher was convicted. Beginning in 2002, UCC made environmentalism a core component of students' education, put focus on the issue of boys' education, and, since 2007, has aimed to improve the student body's socioeconomic mix.
A number of extracurricular sports, arts, and community service programs are run at UCC, some by students, such as the World Affairs Conference. The operation of the school is overseen by a board of governors and the college engages in fundraising for construction projects, to augment its endowment, and to fund scholarships. A link to the Canadian Royal Family is maintained through Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, as the official Visitor.