The Radical-Socialist and Radical Republican Party (French: Parti républicain, radical et radical-socialiste) was a liberal and formerly social-liberal political party in France. It was also often referred to simply as the Radical Party (French: Parti radical), or to prevent confusion with other French Radical parties as the Parti radical valoisien (after its headquarters on the rue de Valois), abbreviated to Rad, PR, or PRV.
Founded in 1901, it was the oldest active political party in France at the time of its dissolution. Coming from the Radical Republican tradition, the Radical Party upheld the principles of private property, social justice and secularism. The Radicals were originally a left-wing group, but with the emergence of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) in 1905 they shifted gradually towards the political centre. In 1926, its right wing split off to form the Unionist (or National) Radicals. In 1972, the left wing of the party split off to form the centre-left Radical Party of the Left (PRG). The Radical Party then affiliated with the centre-right, becoming one of the founder parties of the Union for French Democracy (UDF) in 1978. In 2002, the party split from the UDF and became an associate party of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) and were represented on the Liaison Committee for the Presidential Majority prior to launching The Alliance (ARES) in 2011 and the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI) in 2012.
After the 2017 presidential and legislative elections, negotiations to merge the PR and the PRG began. The refounding congress to reunite the parties into the Radical Movement was held on 9 and 10 December 2017. However, a minority of the PRG refused to unite with PR and founded a new party, which was joined by some left-wing members of the Radical Movement (most notably the last president of the PRG Sylvia Pinel) a year later, when the movement decided to ally Emmanuel Macron's La République En Marche! for the 2019 European Parliament election.