Count Sergei Yulyevich Witte (Russian: Серге́й Ю́льевич Ви́тте, romanized: Sergéj Júl'jevič Vitte, pronounced [ˈvʲitɨ]; 29 June [O.S. 17 June] 1849  – 13 March [O.S. 28 February] 1915), also known as Sergius Witte, was a highly influential econometrician, minister, and prime minister in Imperial Russia, one of the key figures in the political arena at the end of 19th and at the beginning of the 20th century. He was made a count because of his service to the government in negotiations over the end of the Russo-Japanese War.
Witte was neither a liberal nor a conservative. He attracted foreign capital to boost Russia's industrialization. He served under the last two emperors of Russia, Alexander III and Nicholas II. During the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78), he had risen to a position in which he controlled all the traffic passing to the front along the lines of the Odessa Railways. As Minister of Finance, Witte presided over extensive industrialization and achieved monopoly control by the government over an expanded system of railroad lines. 
Following months of civil unrest and outbreaks of violence, in what was known as the 1905 Russian Revolution, he framed the October Manifesto of 1905, and the accompanying government communication to establish constitutional government. He was not convinced it would solve Russia's problems with the Tsarist autocracy. On 20 October 1905 Witte was appointed as the first Chairman of the Russian Council of Ministers (effectively Prime Minister). Assisted by his Council, he designed Russia's first constitution. But within a few months, Witte fell into disgrace as a reformer because of continuing court opposition to these changes. He resigned before the First Duma assembled. Witte was fully confident that he had resolved the main problem: providing political stability to the regime, but according to him, the "peasant problem" would further determine the character of the Duma's activity.Witte has been described by Figes as the 'great reforming finance minister of the 1890s', 'one of Nicholas's most enlightened ministers', and the architect of Russia's new parliamentary order in 1905.