Kryvyi Rih (Ukrainian: Криви́й Ріг [krɪˌwɪj ˈr⁽ʲ⁾iɦ], lit. 'Crooked Horn' or 'Curved Cape') or Krivoy Rog (Russian: Кривой Рог [krʲɪˌvoj ˈrok]) is a city in the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast of Ukraine; it is the 7th-most populous city in the country. It lies within a large urban area, administratively incorporated with Kryvyi Rih Municipality as a city of regional significance. It also serves as the administrative center of the district, although it is not part of it. 
Located at the confluence of the Saksahan and Inhulets rivers, Kryvyi Rih has been a major settlement for most of its history. It was founded as a postal city in 1775 by the Cossacks. Developed as a military settlement until 1860, it formed part of Kherson Governorate. It was incorporated during the 20th century with areas of Yekaterinoslav. The township began to expand "at an astonishing rate" at the beginning of the 1880s. Kryvyi Rih's urbanization was unplanned and stimulated by mining exploitation. French and English investment contributed to a boom in metallurgy, iron mining, and investigation of rich deposits of iron ore. The Yekateryninska Railway was built in 1884 to transport iron ore to the Donbas. This catalyzed the growth of Kryvyi Rih into a major industrial town; it gained city status in 1919.
Nationalization and investment spurred by Soviet authorities led to extensive growth. In 1934 Kryvorizhstal was built, the first of more than 500 factories. Kryvyi Rih National University was founded here. Financially, the city's postwar growth after the Nazi occupation increased after 1965 due to economic reforms. Also, investment spurred by Ukrainian Independence, institution of a market economy led to extensive regeneration, particularly in the city centre.
As of 2016 Kryvyi Rih is arguably the main steel-industry city of Eastern Europe. It is a large, globally important centre of the iron-ore mining and metallurgy region, known as the Kryvbas. The economy of the oblast is the second-largest in Ukraine (after Kiev).

