The Bandung Institute of Technology (Indonesian: Institut Teknologi Bandung, abbreviated as ITB) is a state, coeducational research university located in Bandung, Indonesia. Established in 1920, ITB is the oldest and first technology-oriented university in Indonesia.
ITB was considered the top choice among Indonesia's high school students in 2006 and has been credited as one of the most prestigious universities in Indonesia, together with Gadjah Mada University and University of Indonesia. Sukarno, the first president of the Republic of Indonesia, earned his engineering degree in civil engineering from ITB. Furthermore, B. J. Habibie, the third president of Indonesia, also spent a year in the mechanical engineering department of ITB and is officially recognized as a graduate.
The university cultivates professional and social activities by supporting its students' unions, the student government councils that exist in every department. Each students' union has its own distinctly designed jacket that, among other traditions, serves as part of its member identity. There are also a number of student activity units/clubs supporting ITB student interests in rounding out their educational experience. It is not uncommon that the students and alumni are identified by the clubs to which they belong (or used to belong) at ITB, in addition to their class year and major.
The university is a member of LAOTSE, an international network of leading universities in Europe and Asia exchanging students and senior scholars.
As of early 2016, ITB had nine undergraduate study programs been internationally accredited from an independent U.S.-based accrediting institution, Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, where ITB and IPB or Bogor Agricultural University are the only public universities in Indonesia with this particular international accrediting institution. The ten study programs are Electrical Engineering, Informatics, Chemical Engineering, Engineering Physics, Industrial Engineering, Engineering Management, Ocean Engineering, Petroleum Engineering, Civil Engineering, and Environmental Engineering.
ITB's march "Mars ITB" and hymn "Hymne ITB" were arranged by a former professor, Prof. Dr. Sudjoko Danoesoebrata.