Club Atlético River Plate, commonly known as River Plate, is an Argentine professional sports club based in the Núñez neighborhood of Buenos Aires, founded on 25 May 1901, and named after the English name for the city's estuary, Río de la Plata. Although many sports are practiced at the club, River Plate is best known for its professional football team, which has won Argentina's Primera División championship a record of 36 times, its latest title the 2014 Final. Domestic achievements also include 12 national cups, with the 2018–19 Copa Argentina as the most recent. Those achievements place River Plate as the most winning team of domestic competitions with 48 titles won in the top division. In Second Division, the club has won two titles, in 1908 and 2011–12.At international level, River Plate has won 18 titles, with 12 organised by CONMEBOL and other international bodies. River Plate's achievements include four Copa Libertadores, one Intercontinental Cup, one Supercopa Sudamericana, one Copa Sudamericana, three Recopa Sudamericana, one Copa Interamericana and one Suruga Bank Championship. Furthermore, the club has also won six tournaments organized by AFA and AUF together: five Copa Dr. Ricardo Aldao, and one Tie Cup. In addition, River Plate's reserve team won the U-20 Copa Libertadores in 2012.
River Plate is the first and only team to simultaneously hold CONMEBOL's four current major international competitions, after winning the 2014 Copa Sudamericana, 2015 Recopa Sudamericana, the 2015 Copa Libertadores, and the 2015 Suruga Bank Championship.In a survey published by the Argentine Football Association in 2016, 6 out of 11 players of the all-time Argentina national squad had played for River Plate. Previously, in 2000, River Plate had been honored by FIFA as the 9th best club of the century in the world and the best Argentine football club in that ranking. In 2010, the International Federation of Football History and Statistics placed River Plate in the 9th place in a ranking that included the best teams of the world during the 1990s and 2000s. River was the South American club with the best position in the table. Among other achievements, River Plate is at the top of the list in the All-time Argentine Primera División table, being the Argentine team with most won games, fewest defeated games, most points accumulated, most goals scored, fewest goals against and best goal difference since the first championship held in 1891 and is first in the Historical table of the Copa Libertadores being the South American team with most won games.River has a fierce rivalry with Boca Juniors. Matches between them are known as Superclásico, and the two teams' rivalry is amongst the most heated in the sport, due to their local and global popularity. River's home stadium is Estadio Monumental Antonio Vespucio Liberti, the largest stadium in the country, and it is simply known as El Monumental, which is located in the Belgrano district.
Apart from football, the club hosts a large variety of sports such as athletics, basque pelota, bowls, chess, basketball, handball, cestoball, gymnastics, field hockey, karate, roller hockey, roller skating, swimming, taekwondo, tennis, volleyball, waterpolo, and eSports.