Little Mix are a British girl group formed in 2011 during the eighth series of the British version of The X Factor. They were the first group to win the competition, and following their victory, they signed with Simon Cowell's record label Syco Music and released a cover of Damien Rice's "Cannonball" as their winner's single. The group is known for their strong vocals and signature harmonies, as well as their representation of female empowerment and unity. One of the most successful acts to emerge from The X Factor, the members are Jade Thirlwall, Perrie Edwards, Leigh-Anne Pinnock, and Jesy Nelson.Little Mix released their debut album DNA in 2012, which peaked inside the top 10 in ten countries including the UK and US. This made Little Mix the first girl group since the Pussycat Dolls to reach the US top five with their debut album, as well as earning the highest debut US chart position for a British girl group's first release, breaking the record previously held by the Spice Girls. The group's second album Salute (2013) became their second album to debut inside the top 10 in both the UK and US. Their third album Get Weird was released in 2015, and was certified double platinum in the UK. Their fourth album Glory Days (2016) became their first number one album in the UK, and also achieved the longest-reigning girl group number one album since the Spice Girls' debut album 20 years earlier, and the highest first week UK album sales for a girl band since 1997. The album was also certified triple platinum by the BPI. In the UK, the group has earned four number-one singles, including "Wings", "Black Magic" and "Shout Out to My Ex". Their fifth studio album LM5 was released in 2018 to generally favourable reviews and was certified gold. The group have sold over 50 million records worldwide, making them one of the best-selling girl groups of all time.The group won Best British Single for "Shout Out to My Ex" at the 2017 Brit Awards and they won Best British Video for "Woman Like Me" at the 2019 Brit Awards; they have also received several other awards during their career, including three MTV Europe Music Awards, two Teen Choice Awards, five Global Awards, two Glamour Awards and nine Brit Award nominations. Their Glory Days Tour and Get Weird Tour are the fifth and eighth highest grossing tour for a girl group of all time, respectively, with the latter being the biggest-selling UK arena tour of 2016. As of August 2018, the group has achieved four platinum certified albums and sixteen certified singles in the UK. Little Mix appeared on Debrett's 2017 list of the most influential people in the UK, and on the Sunday Times Young Rich List for three consecutive years since 2017.

