Spaniards, or Spanish people, are a Romance ethnic group and nation native to Spain. Within Spain, there are a number of National and regional ethnic identities that reflect the country's complex history and diverse cultures, including a number of different languages, among which Spanish is the majority language and the only one that is official throughout the whole country.
Commonly spoken regional languages include, most notably, Basque (a Paleohispanic language), Catalan and Galician (the latter two are both Romance languages like Spanish). Many populations outside Spain have ancestors who emigrated from Spain and share elements of a Hispanic culture. The most notable of these comprise Hispanic America in the Western Hemisphere.
The Roman Republic conquered Iberia during the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. As a result of Roman colonization, the majority of local languages, with the exception of Basque, stem from the Vulgar Latin. The Germanic Vandals and Suebi, with part of the Iranian Alans under King Respendial, conquered the peninsula in 409 AD. They were followed by the Visigoths, who founded the Visigothic Kingdom. In 711 the Iberian Peninsula was conquered and brought under the rule of the Arab Umayyads. In the 11th and 12th centuries the Muslim Almohads and the Almoravids established Berber North African dynasties extending to this area. In the Middle Ages several Romance languages developed in the peninsula; Spanish would eventually become the main language in most of Spain.
Following the Christian Reconquista against the Moors, the modern Spanish state was formed in the late 15th century by the union of the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, the conquest of the last Muslim Nasrid Kingdom of Granada in 1492, (the same year that Christopher Columbus reached the Americas), and the Canary Islands. In the early 16th century Spain also conquered the Kingdom of Navarre. In this period, Spain began to create an empire in the Americas.
It persecuted religious minorities in Spain, such as Jews and Muslims, requiring them either to convert (conversos) to Catholicism or be expelled. Heresy was persecuted by the established Catholic Church, the state religion, by the Spanish Inquisition.
The population of Spain has become more diverse due to immigration of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. From 2000 to 2010, Spain had among the highest per capita immigration rates in the world and the second-highest absolute net migration in the world (after the United States). The diverse regional and cultural populations mainly include the Castilians, Catalans, Andalusians, Valencians, Balearics, Canarians, Basques and the Galicians among others.