The University of Edinburgh (abbreviated as Edin. in post-nominals), founded in 1582, is the sixth oldest university  in the English-speaking world and one of Scotland's ancient universities. The university has five main campuses in the city of Edinburgh, with many of the buildings in the historic Old Town belonging to the university. The university played an important role in leading Edinburgh to its reputation as a chief intellectual centre during the Age of Enlightenment, and helped give the city the nickname of the Athens of the North.
The University of Edinburgh is ranked 20th in the world by the 2020 QS World University Rankings. It is ranked as the 6th best university in Europe by the U.S. News' Best Global Universities Ranking, and 7th best in Europe by the Times Higher Education Ranking. The Research Excellence Framework, a research ranking used by the UK government to determine future research funding, ranked Edinburgh (joint submission with Heriot-Watt) 4th in the UK for research power, and 11th overall. It is ranked the 48th most employable university in the world by the 2020 Global Employability University Ranking.  It is a member of both the Russell Group, and the League of European Research Universities, a consortium of 21 research universities in Europe. It has the third largest endowment of any university in the United Kingdom, after the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. The annual income of the institution for 2018–19 was £1,080.6 million of which £285.7 million was from research grants and contracts, with an expenditure of £1,211.9 million.Alumni of the university include some of the major figures of modern history, including 3 signatories of the American declaration of independence and 9 heads of state and government (including 3 Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom). As of March 2019, Edinburgh's alumni, faculty members and researchers include 19 Nobel laureates, 3 Turing Award laureates, 1 Fields Medalist, 1 Abel Prize winner, 2 Pulitzer Prize winners, 2 currently sitting UK Supreme Court Justices, and several Olympic gold medallists. It continues to have links to the British Royal Family, having had the Duke of Edinburgh as its Chancellor from 1953 to 2010 and Princess Anne since 2011.Edinburgh receives approximately 60,000 applications every year, making it the second most popular university in the UK by volume of applications. It has the 4th-highest average UCAS entry tariff in Scotland, and 8th overall in the UK.