The Donetsk People's Republic (DPR or DNR; Russian: Донецкая Народная Республика, tr. Donetskaya Narodnaya Respublika, IPA: [dɐˈnʲɛtskəjə nɐˈrodnəjə rʲɪˈspublʲɪkə], Ukrainian: Донецька Народна Республіка, romanized: Donets'ka Narodna Respublika) is a Russia-backed proto-state in the eastern Ukrainian Oblast of Donetsk. The proto-state is recognised only by the partially recognised South Ossetia and Russia-backed proto-state Luhansk People's Republic (LPR). The capital city and largest city within the is Donetsk. The current head of state is Denis Pushilin.The DPR declared its Independence after the 2014 Ukrainian revolution, alongside the LPR and the Republic of Crimea. An ongoing armed conflict between Ukraine and the DPR and LPR followed their declarations of independence. The LPR and DPR receive humanitarian assistance from Russia. According to NATO and Ukraine, Russia had also provided military aid to the rebels, a claim that Russia denies. Ukraine claims that both the DPR and LPR are terrorist organizations, although this designation is not supported by the Supreme Court of Ukraine or by international governments including the EU, US, or Russia.The February 2015 Minsk agreement signed by the DPR, LDR and Ukraine was meant to stop the conflict and reintegrate rebel held territory into Ukraine in exchange for more autonomy for this area. But the agreement was never fully implemented.Since February 2017, Russia has been recognising identity documents, diplomas, birth and marriage certificates, and vehicle registration plates which have been issued by the DPR; and has said that it will continue to do so until a "political settlement of the situation" in separatist-controlled regions, based on the Minsk II agreement, is reached. NATO, Ukrainian and Western military experts have claimed that regular Russian units have been aiding the DPR and LPR, who have modern Russian tanks and artillery. Russia has denied this, but has stated that Russian volunteers are helping the DPR and LPR.Along with the Luhansk People's Republic and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the Donetsk People's Republic is considered by Ukraine one of three temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine as a result of Russian military intervention.The DPR and the Ukrainian government estimate that over 50% of the total population of Donetsk Oblast, around 1,870,000 people, live in DPR-held regions. Although the rebels do not control most of Donetsk Oblast in terms of area, only controlling 7,853 km2, they hold major cities like Donetsk, the capital, and Horlivka.