Lynn Rene Anderson (September 26, 1947 – July 30, 2015) was an American country music singer known for a string of hits from the late 1960s to the 1980s, most notably her worldwide mega-hit "Rose Garden" (1970).  Anderson's crossover appeal and regular exposure on national television helped her become country music's first mainstream female superstar in the early 1970s; taking the genre to venues around the world that previously had not been receptive.  In 1970, she became the first female country star to appear on The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson and, in 1974, the first to headline and sellout Madison Square Garden in New York City. Anderson was among the most highly awarded female country recording artists of her era, and her version of "Rose Garden" stands as one of the most successful crossover recordings of all-time. Anderson charted 12 No. 1, 18 Top 10, and more than 50 Top 40 hit singles.  In addition to being named "Top Female Vocalist" by the Academy of Country Music (ACM) twice and "Female Vocalist of the Year" by the Country Music Association (CMA), she also won a Grammy Award (earning seven nominations), People's Choice Award and an American Music Award (AMA). Record World, one of three major industry trade magazines at the time (Billboard and Cashbox the other two), named Lynn Anderson 'Artist of the Decade' for 1970-80.  Additionally, Anderson was the first female country artist to win the American Music Award (1974).   All genres combined, she was the #13 music artist of the 1970s according to Joel Whitburn and the highest ranking country artist not yet in the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum.
According to Kyle Young, CEO of the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, "Anderson's television background and her ability to bring show-business dynamism to recordings and concert performances helped her achieve crossover success. With talent and tenacity, the country music star brought increased visibility to the genre." She continued to record and remained a popular concert draw until her death, regularly headlining major casino showrooms, performing arts centers, and theaters.