Duke University is a private research university in Durham, North Carolina. Founded by Methodists and Quakers in the present-day town of Trinity in 1838, the school moved to Durham in 1892. In 1924, tobacco and electric power industrialist James Buchanan Duke established The Duke Endowment and the institution changed its name to honor his deceased father, Washington Duke.
Duke is often ranked as one of the world's top 25 universities, and similarly, is often ranked top 10 in the United States. The Wall Street Journal has also named Duke as the best university for graduate outcomes for several years in a row (tied with Harvard University and Yale University). Several faculty members, affiliates and alumni have been awarded the Nobel Prize in recent years. Notable examples since 2012 include Robert Lefkowitz, Brian Kobilka, Gregg L. Semenza, Paul Modrich, William Kaelin, and George Smith. In 2019, Clarivate Analytics named 54 members of Duke's faculty to its list of "Highly Cited Researchers". That number places Duke 8th among the world's universities.Duke's campus spans over 8,600 acres (3,500 hectares) on three contiguous sub-campuses in Durham as well as a marine lab in Beaufort. The West Campus—designed largely by architect Julian Abele—incorporates Gothic architecture with the 210-foot (64-meter) Duke Chapel at the campus' center and highest point of elevation, is adjacent to the Medical Center. East Campus, 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) away, home to all first-years, contains Georgian-style architecture. The university administers two concurrent schools in Asia, Duke-NUS Medical School in Singapore (established in 2005) and Duke Kunshan University in Kunshan, China (established in 2013).As of 2019, 15 Nobel laureates and 3 Turing Award winners have been affiliated with the university. Duke alumni also include 50 Rhodes Scholars and 25 Churchill Scholars. The university has produced the fifth-highest number of Rhodes, Marshall, Truman, Goldwater, and Udall Scholars of any American university between 1986 and 2015. Duke is the alma mater of one president of the United States (Richard Nixon) and 14 living billionaires.