Hampshire College is a private liberal arts college in Amherst, Massachusetts. It was opened in 1970 as an experiment in alternative education, in association with four other colleges in the Pioneer Valley: Amherst College, Smith College, Mount Holyoke College, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Together they have since been known as the Five Colleges or the Five College Consortium.
The college is known for its alternative curriculum, socially liberal politics, focus on portfolios rather than distribution requirements, and its reliance on narrative evaluations instead of grades and GPAs. In some fields, it is among the top undergraduate institutions in percentage of graduates who enroll in graduate school. Sixty-five percent of its alumni have at least one graduate degree and a quarter have founded their own business or organization.  It is ranked #39 among U.S. colleges and universities by the percentage of graduates who go on to earn a doctorate degree according to National Science Foundation data.The college announced in January 2019 that it was experiencing severe financial difficulties and seeking a merger with another institution. However, due to backlash and pressure from the college community, Hampshire announced in April 2019 that it would shift focus to a capital campaign and a re-envisioning project to ensure a stable and sustainable independent future. The school had announced in February 2019 that it would only admit students who were already offered early admission or who had previously deferred admission—early admission students were also released from their pledge to only enroll at Hampshire, but as of the April 2019 announcement, the school was planning to begin accepting new students for Spring 2020. In Fall 2019, Hampshire welcomed an incoming class of 13 students. In August 2019, Hampshire hired its tenth President, Edward Wingenbach. The following fall, the College's faculty, staff, students, and alumni embarked on a community-wide effort to revise the curriculum in order to increase interdisciplinarity, collaboration, and access.