Ariadna Thalía Sodi Miranda Mottola (Spanish pronunciation: [aˈɾjaðna taˈli.a ˈsoði miˈɾanda]; born 26 August 1971), known mononymously as Thalía, is a Mexican singer, business woman, and actress. She is considered one of the most successful and influential Mexican artists worldwide. Apart from her native Spanish, Thalía has also sung in English, French, Portuguese and Tagalog.She is referred to as the "Queen of Latin Pop" by international media because of her renown within the Latin pop music scene for the last three decades. Having sold around 25 million records worldwide, Thalía is one of the best-selling latin music artists. She has received numerous accolades, including five Billboard Latin Music Awards (from 17 nominations), several Premios Juventud and Lo Nuestro Awards, as well as seven Latin Grammy Award nominations and a special Latin Grammy "President's Merit Award" in 2019.
She has collaborated with renowned artists, such as Tony Bennett, Michael Bublé, Robbie Williams, Marc Anthony, Laura Pausini, Romeo Santos and Carlos Vives as well as with younger popular artists like Maluma, Prince Royce, Becky G, Natti Natasha, Gente de Zona, Lali and Pabllo Vittar.
As an actress, Thalía starred in a variety of successful telenovelas that aired in over 180 countries and that led to her being referred to as the "Queen of telenovelas" by the mass media. The global impact of her novelas helped her to popularize her music in non-Spanish speaking territories and markets in Europe and Asia. The Mexican media company Televisa has named her the best-paid telenovela actress in history, while Billboard names her the most widely recognized Spanish-speaking soap star in the world.In 2011, Terra Networks included her in its list of "powerful and iconic women in Latin music". She is also a successful fashion brand owner (having signed an exclusive deal with Macy's), has her own nationally syndicated radio show and is the author of four books, including her memoir. On 5 December 2013 she was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame as a recognition for her achievements as an artist.