Paul Weston (born Paul Wetstein, March 12, 1912 – September 20, 1996) was an American pianist, arranger, composer, and conductor who worked in music and television from the 1930s to the 1970s, pioneering mood music and becoming known as "the Father of Mood Music". His compositions include popular music songs such as "I Should Care", "Day by Day", and "Shrimp Boats". He also wrote classical pieces, including "Crescent City Suite" and religious music, authoring several hymns and masses.
Born Paul Wetstein in Springfield, Massachusetts, Weston had a keen interest in music from an early age and learned to play the piano. He was educated at Springfield High School, then attended Dartmouth College and Columbia University.
At Dartmouth, he formed his own band and toured with the college band. He joined Columbia's dance band, The Blue Lions, but was temporarily unable to perform following a rail accident, and he did some arrangements while he recovered. Weston sold his first musical arrangements to Joe Haymes in 1934. After Haymes requested more material, Weston's music was heard by Rudy Vallée, who offered him work on his radio show. Weston met Tommy Dorsey through Haymes and in 1936 became a member of Dorsey's orchestra. Weston persuaded Dorsey to hire The Pied Pipers after hearing them in 1938, and the group toured with the bandleader.
After leaving Dorsey in 1940, Weston worked with Dinah Shore and moved to Hollywood after being offered work in films. In California he met Johnny Mercer, who invited him to write for his new label, Capitol Records. Weston became music director at Capitol, where he worked with Jo Stafford and developed the mood music genre. Stafford moved with him to Columbia Records in 1950, and the couple were married in 1952.
Weston worked extensively in television from the 1950s to the 1970s. He helped start the Grammy Awards, which were first presented in 1959. He was honored with a Grammy Trustees Award in 1971 and spent three years as music director of Disney on Parade.
Weston and Stafford developed a comedy routine in which they assumed the guise of a bad lounge act named Jonathan and Darlene Edwards. Their first album was released in 1957. In 1960, their album Jonathan and Darlene Edwards in Paris won the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album. Weston's work in music is honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.