Portuguese people are a Romance ethnic group indigenous to Portugal who share a common Portuguese culture, ancestry and language. Their predominant religion is Christianity, mainly Roman Catholicism, though large segments of the population, especially the younger generations, have no religious affiliation. The Portuguese people's heritage largely derives from the pre-Celts (Lusitanians, Conii) and Celts (Gallaecians, Turduli and Celtici), who were Romanized after the conquest of the region by the ancient Romans. A number of Portuguese can also trace minor descent from Germanic tribes who arrived after the Roman period as ruling elites, namely the Suebi, Vandals and Visigoths, who ruled for circa three hundred years. Finally, the Moorish occupation left a genetic contribution in the Iberian Peninsula, especially in western and southern regions.The Roman Republic conquered the Iberian Peninsula during the 2nd and 1st centuries B.C. from the extensive maritime empire of Carthage during the series of Punic Wars.  As a result of Roman colonization, the Portuguese language stems primarily from Vulgar Latin. Due to the large historical extent from the 16th century of the Portuguese Empire and the subsequent colonization of territories in Asia, Africa and the Americas, as well as historical and recent emigration, Portuguese communities can be found in many diverse regions around the globe, and a large Portuguese diaspora exists.
Portuguese people began an Age of Exploration which started in 1415 with the conquest of Ceuta and culminated in an empire with territories that are now part of over 50 countries. The Portuguese Empire lasted nearly 600 years, seeing its end when Macau was returned to China in 1999. The discovery of several lands unknown to Europeans in the Americas, Africa, Asia and Oceania (southwest Pacific Ocean), forged the Portuguese Empire described as the first global empire in history, also paving the way for the domination of Western civilisation by other neighbouring European nations.

