The Labour Party (Bokmål: Arbeiderpartiet; Nynorsk: Arbeidarpartiet; A/Ap), formerly the Norwegian Labour Party, is a social-democratic political party in Norway. It was the senior partner of the governing Red-Green Coalition from 2005–13, and its leader, Jens Stoltenberg, served as Prime Minister of Norway during that time. The party is currently led by Jonas Gahr Støre.
The Labour Party is officially committed to social democratic ideals. Its slogan since the 1930s has been "everyone shall take part", and the party traditionally seeks a strong welfare state, funded through taxes and duties. Since the 1980s, the party has included more of the principles of a social market economy in its policy, allowing for privatisation of state-owned assets and services and reducing income tax progressivity, following the wave of economic liberalisation during the 1980s. During the first Stoltenberg government, the party's policies were inspired by Tony Blair's New Labour agenda in the United Kingdom and saw the most widespread privatisation by any Norwegian government to that date. The party has frequently been described as increasingly neoliberal since the 1980s, both by political scientists and opponents on the left. The Labour Party profiles itself as a progressive party that subscribes to co-operation on a national as well as international level. Its youth wing is the Workers' Youth League. The party is a member of the Party of European Socialists and Progressive Alliance. The Labour Party has always been a strong supporter of Norwegian NATO membership and has supported Norway joining the European Union during two referendums. During the Cold War, when the party was in government most of the time, the party closely aligned Norway with the United States at the international level and followed an anti-communist policy at the domestic level, in the aftermath of the 1948 Kråkerøy speech and culminating in Norway becoming a founding member of NATO in 1949.Founded in 1887, the party steadily increased in support until it became the largest party in Norway at the 1927 election; a position it has held ever since. This year also saw the consolidation of conflicts surrounding the party during the 1920s following its membership in the Comintern from 1919–23. It first formed a government in 1928, and has led the government for all but sixteen years since 1935. From 1945 to 1961, the party had an absolute majority in the Norwegian parliament, to date the last time this has happened in the history of Norway. The electoral domination by the Labour Party, during the 1960s and early-1970s, was initially broken by competition from smaller left-wing parties; primarily from the Socialist People's Party. From the late-1970s however, the party started to lose voters due to a rise in right-wing parties, leading to a swing to the right for the Labour Party under Gro Harlem Brundtland during the 1980s. In 2001, the party achieved its worst results since the 1924 election. Between 2005–13, Labour returned to power after committing to a coalition agreement with other parties in order to form a majority government. Since losing nine seats at the 2013 election, Labour has been in opposition. The party lost a further six seats at the 2017 election, yielding the second-lowest number of seats Labour has held since 1924.