Terminator Salvation is a 2009 American military science fiction action film directed by McG and written by John Brancato and Michael Ferris. It is the fourth installment of the Terminator film series and a standalone sequel to 2003's Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines. The film stars Christian Bale and Sam Worthington, with Anton Yelchin, Moon Bloodgood, Bryce Dallas Howard, Common, Michael Ironside, and Helena Bonham Carter in supporting roles. In a departure from the previous installments, Salvation is a post-apocalyptic film set in the year 2018. It focuses on the war between Skynet's machine network and humanity, as the remnants of the world's military have united to form the Resistance to fight against Skynet's killing machines. Bale portrays John Connor, a Resistance fighter and central character, while Worthington portrays cyborg Marcus Wright. Yelchin plays a young Kyle Reese, a character first introduced in The Terminator, and the film depicts the origins of the T-800 Terminator.
After a troubled pre-production, with The Halcyon Company acquiring the rights from Andrew G. Vajna and Mario Kassar, and several writers working on the screenplay, filming began in May 2008 in New Mexico, and ran for 77 days. Terminator Salvation was released on May 21, 2009 by Warner Bros. Pictures in North America and by Columbia Pictures internationally, and grossed over $371 million worldwide and received mixed reviews. 
Salvation was intended to be the first installment of a second Terminator trilogy, set mainly in the future war and culminating in Skynet's defeat, with Bale, Yelchin, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Robert Patrick reprising their roles from previous films. However, the direct sequels were canceled, and were later published in a comic-book series from 2013–2014 as Terminator Salvation: The Final Battle. The film Terminator Genisys, released in 2015, was intended to be a reboot, the first of a new trilogy. Those plans were scrapped, and in 2019, Terminator: Dark Fate continued the original saga as a direct sequel to Terminator 2: Judgment Day.

