The Sugababes are a British girl group, composed of Keisha Buchanan, Mutya Buena, and Siobhán Donaghy. Formed in 1998, they released their debut album One Touch through London Records in November 2000 which achieved moderate success and spawned the hit single Overload. In 2001, Donaghy departed the group and was replaced by Heidi Range. With Range's introduction, the group began to experience a higher level of commercial success, going on to release three multi-platinum selling albums, Angels with Dirty Faces (2002), Three (2003), and Taller in More Ways (2005). In 2005, Buena announced her departure, leading to Amelle Berrabah being brought in to replace her. Following the release of their first greatest hits album, the new line-up released two further studio albums, Change (2007) and Catfights and Spotlights (2008).
In September 2009, after 11 years in the Sugababes, Buchanan, the final original member, was replaced by former UK Eurovision entry Jade Ewen. Range, Berrabah and Ewen released the group's seventh studio album, Sweet 7, in 2010, after which they signed to RCA Records, before announcing an indefinite hiatus in 2011. The same year, the original line-up of the band reformed in 2011 as Mutya Keisha Siobhan and released the single "Flatline". Following another hiatus, the trio regained the name Sugababes in September 2019 and recorded a rendition of the song "Flowers" along with DJ Spoony. 
In 2006, British Hit Singles & Albums named the Sugababes as the most successful female act of the 21st century with six UK number-one singles and eighteen UK top ten hits. They achieved six number-one singles, "Freak like Me", "Round Round", "Hole in the Head", "Push the Button", "Walk This Way" and "About You Now"; the Spice Girls are the only British girl group to have had more. They also released five UK top ten albums, four of which reached at least platinum certification in the UK, and have been nominated for six Brit Awards, winning one for Best British Dance Act in 2003. They have been a long-term fixture in the British tabloids due to their several line-up changes and alleged group infighting.