Queen Mary University of London (QMUL, or informally QM) is a public research university in London, England, and a constituent college of the federal University of London. It dates back to the foundation of London Hospital Medical College in 1785. Queen Mary College, named after Mary of Teck, was admitted to the University of London in 1915 and in 1989 merged with Westfield College to form Queen Mary and Westfield College. In 1995 Queen Mary and Westfield College merged with St Bartholomew's Hospital Medical College and the London Hospital Medical College to form the School of Medicine and Dentistry.
Queen Mary has five campuses across East and Central London in Mile End, Whitechapel, Charterhouse Square, Lincoln's Inn Fields and West Smithfield, as well as an international presence in China, France, Greece and Malta. The Mile End campus is the largest self-contained campus of any London-based Russell Group university. In 2018/19 the university had around 26,000 students. Queen Mary is organised into three faculties – the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, the Faculty of Science and Engineering and Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry.
Queen Mary is a member of the Russell Group of British research universities, the Association of Commonwealth Universities and Universities UK. Queen Mary is a major centre for medical teaching and research and is part of UCLPartners, the world's largest academic health science centre. Queen Mary run programmes at the University of London Institute in Paris, taking over the functions provided by Royal Holloway. Queen Mary also collaborates with University of London to offer its Global MBA program. For 2017–18, Queen Mary had a turnover of £459.5 million, including £106.5 million from research grants and contracts.In the 2019/20 international university rankings, Queen Mary ranked 126th (QS World University Rankings), 110th in the world and 12th in the UK (Times Higher Education World University Rankings), 13th best global university in the UK (U.S. News and World Report) and 151–200 (Academic Ranking of World Universities). In the national rankings for UK universities, Queen Mary ranked 41st by The Complete University Guide 2020, 49th by The Times/Sunday Times Good University Guide 2020 and 83rd by The Guardian University Guide 2020.  Queen Mary has produced many notable alumni in various fields of work and study around the world with several alumni having become notable leaders in their respective fields. There are nine Nobel Laureates amongst Queen Mary's alumni, current and former staff.