Geraldine Estelle Horner (née Halliwell) (born 6 August 1972), is an English singer, songwriter, author, philanthropist and actress. Halliwell came to international prominence in the 1990s as Ginger Spice, a member of the  wildly successful girl group the Spice Girls, which was also the best-selling girl group of all time, with over 85 million records sold, of which 75 million copies were sold with the quintet line-up including Halliwell. The phrase "girl power", regularly uttered by all five members, was most closely associated with Halliwell. Her Union Jack dress from the 1997 Brit Awards also became an enduring symbol of girl power. In 1998, Halliwell left the Spice Girls to pursue a solo career but later returned to the group when they reunited in 2007. Halliwell reportedly amassed a $40 million fortune during her last two years in the group.In 1999, Halliwell launched her solo career and released her debut album, Schizophonic, which spawned three number ones at the UK Singles Chart: "Mi Chico Latino", "Lift Me Up", and "Bag It Up", while the lead single, "Look at Me", peaked at number two. In 2001, Halliwell released her second album, Scream If You Wanna Go Faster; the first single, "It's Raining Men", was also used on the Bridget Jones's Diary film soundtrack, peaked at number one in the UK and went on to become the biggest hit of her career. The singles that followed, Scream If You Wanna Go Faster and Calling, reached number eight and number seven in the United Kingdom, respectively. She released her third studio album Passion in 2005, including the worldwide hit "Ride It", which was commercially successful in the rest of Europe. It peaked at number two in Russia, number four in the UK, while reaching number three on the Belgium, Spain and the Scottish charts.After a few years of relative obscurity, in April 2010, Halliwell announced that she had started working on new music. In April 2013, the Nine Network announced that she would become the fourth judge on Australia's Got Talent. On 12 September 2013, it was announced that Halliwell would return to the music industry in Australia with the release of her first solo single in nearly eight years, "Half of Me". In 2017, she released a charity single, "Angels in Chains", in tribute to her late friend George Michael, to help the association Childline.
Since 1996, Halliwell has sold more than 90 million records, of which 15 million were as a solo artist and a further 75 million during her tenure with the Spice Girls. As of 2020, she has amassed a personal fortune of over £50 million.