Oles Honchar Dnipro National University (Ukrainian: Дніпровський національний університет імені Олеся Гончара) is an establishments of higher education in Ukraine. It was founded in 1918. The first four faculties were history and linguistics, law, medicine and physics and mathematics.
Nowadays the university has level IV accreditation, with 20 faculties and 1,300 professors, 850 of them PhDs. The university has about 22,000 Ukrainian students and offers 87 majors. It has about 3,000 international students from 20 countries.
It has strong ties with one of the largest world's rocket space centres, Yuzhnoye Design Bureau, and other industrial and scientific organizations in the Donetsk-Pridneprovsk area with population of more than 15 million people.
Being a big educational and research center, DNU provides training at all qualifications levels: Master's degree, Specialist's degree, Bachelor's degree. It prepares researchers and university teachers at the post-graduate and doctor of science courses. Second higher education can be obtained.
According to a decision of the Intersectorial Accreditation Collegiums and to the order of the Ministry of Sciences and Education of Ukraine Dnipropetrovsk National University has been accredited as a higher institution of the 4-th level accreditation. According to the UNESCO poll DNU takes the 6th place of all Ukrainian higher education institutes due to its academic and research indexes.
DNU has 63 agreements with higher education institutes and research centers from many countries of Europe, Asia, the US, Canada. DNU has joined the work of the TEMPUS Program in Ukraine. The first project on reforming the economy was won in 1993. Since then DNU has won 14 projects (including three more Tempus projects in 2009) for terms of 1 to 3 years in sectors of science and education such as economics, management, university managements, social informatics and international economics.
The library has 2,600,000 volumes and computer library rooms.
Since 2007 DNU has been taking part in the Erasmus Mundus Project “External Cooperation Window”. In the plan there is a paragraph about development of close relations with EU universities, and strengthening of exchange programmes. Participation should raising the skills of DNU teachers and improving the style of teaching. The project can give the possibility of progress in implementation of Bologna standards, including ECTS and quality assurance.