Jabalpur (English: , US also , Hindi: [dʒəbəlˈpʊɾ]; formerly known as Jubbulpore, the official spelling until 2006) is a tier 2 city in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh. It is one of the major cities of Madhya Pradesh. According to the 2011 census, it is the third-largest urban agglomeration in Madhya Pradesh, and the country's 36th-largest urban agglomeration. It is known for the Dhuandhar Falls and the white Marble Rocks at Bhedaghat. It is generally accepted that the game of Snooker originated here.Jabalpur is an important administrative, industrial, and business center of Madhya Pradesh. It is a major education hub in India. The High Court of Madhya Pradesh and several departmental headquarters of the State Government are located in Jabalpur. The city has a major military base and has four major Indian Ordnance Factories for the production of arms and ammunition in India, which are the city's primary source of employment. It also has several other smaller industries. The city is a major trading center and producer of forest products, experiencing fast growth in all sectors.
Jabalpur is the administrative headquarters of Jabalpur district (the second-most-populous district in Madhya Pradesh) and the Jabalpur division. Historically, a center of the Kalachuri and Rajgond dynasties, the city developed a syncretic culture influenced by intermittent Mughal and Maratha reigns.
During the early nineteenth century, it was annexed by British India and renamed as Jubbulpore and incorporated as a cantonment town. Since Indian independence there have been demands for a separate state of Mahakoshal, with Jabalpur its capital. The headquarters of the West Central Railway, Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, Tropical Forest Research Institute (TFRI), and Army headquarters of five states, viz. Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Bihar and Jharkhand, are in Jabalpur. Jabalpur is also the Army Headquarters for The Grenadiers and Jammu and Kashmir Rifles regiments. The city is also the headquarter of 1 Signal Training Centre.