The Union Pacific Corporation (Union Pacific) is a publicly traded railroad holding company. It was established in 1969 and is headquartered in Omaha, Nebraska. It is the parent company of the current form of the Union Pacific Railroad.
Union Pacific was located in New York City from the company's re-founding in 1969 until Drew Lewis became CEO in the mid-1980s. He relocated the corporate headquarters to Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. Later the headquarters was shifted to Dallas, Texas, before relocating the corporate headquarters to Omaha to join the Union Pacific Railroad headquarters. Lance M. Fritz is the current chairman, president and chief executive officer.
The Union Pacific Corporation has a portfolio of acquiring the Missouri Pacific Railroad which included the Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad, the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company, the Western Pacific Railroad, the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, the St. Louis Southwestern Railway, the SPCSL Corporation, and the Southern Pacific Transportation Company. All railroads not including the Southern Pacific Transportation Company were merged into the previous form of the Union Pacific Railroad. As part of the UP-SP merger which included the merging of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, the St. Louis Southwestern Railway and the SPCSL Corporation into the previous form of the Union Pacific Railroad, the Union Pacific Corporation merged the previous form of the Union Pacific Railroad into the Southern Pacific Transportation Company and renamed the Southern Pacific Transportation Company to the current form of the Union Pacific Railroad.
The Union Pacific Corporation's main competitor is Burlington Northern Santa Fe, LLC, the parent company of BNSF Railway. BNSF is the nation's second largest freight rail network and primarily services the same territory as Union Pacific, west of the Mississippi River. Together, Union Pacific and BNSF have a duopoly on all long-haul freight rail service in the Western United States.