The Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Greek: Πανελλήνιο Σοσιαλιστικό Κίνημα, pronounced [paneˈlinio sosjalistiˈko ˈcinima]), known mostly by its acronym PASOK, (; ΠΑΣΟΚ, pronounced [paˈsok]) is a social-democratic political party in Greece. Until 2015, it was one of the two major electoral forces in the country, along with New Democracy, its main political rival.
Following the collapse of the Greek military dictatorship of 1967–1974, PASOK was founded on September 3 1974 by Andreas Papandreou as a socialist, Venizelist, democratic socialist and left-wing nationalist party. As a result of the 1981 legislative election, PASOK formed Greece's first centre-left government. Andreas Papandreou was the leader of the party from its founding to his resignation in 1996, shortly followed by his death on 23 June. In those years, he served three terms as Prime Minister. His successor as president of the party was Costas Simitis, who served two continuous terms as Prime Minister. George Papandreou, Andreas Papandreou's son, then took leadership of the party and was elected as Prime Minister in 2009.
Formerly one of the largest left-wing parties in Greek politics between the 1977 and 2012 elections, PASOK lost much of its popular support as a result of the Greek debt crisis. When the crisis begun, PASOK was the ruling party with George Papandreou as Prime Minister and he was responsible for negotiating the first Greek bailout package with the European troika which necessitated harsh austerity measures. After suffering a significant loss in popularity as a result of the economic crisis, Papandreou resigned in 2011 and Evangelos Venizelos took over as leader of the party. The party was part of two coalition governments from 2011 to 2015, during which further austerity measures were taken in response to the crisis. Due to said measures and the crisis, PASOK went from being the largest party in the Hellenic Parliament with 160 seats (44% of the popular vote) in the 2009 election to being the smallest party with 13 seats (5% of the popular vote) in the January 2015 election. This decline became known as Pasokification.To halt the party's decline, Fofi Gennimata was elected as the new president of the party and PASOK formed a political alliance with the Democratic Left known as the Democratic Alignment. In the September 2015 election, Democratic Alignment was the fourth most voted-for party. In 2018, PASOK merged into a new political alliance of centre-left parties, again led by Gennimata, called the Movement for Change, becoming the third largest party in the Hellenic Parliament in the 2019 election.