Louis Cachet (born Kristian Vikernes, 11 February 1973), professionally known as Varg Vikernes (Norwegian: [ˈvɑrɡ ˈvìːkəɳeːs]), is a Norwegian musician, writer, and convicted murderer. In 1991, he founded the one-man music project Burzum, which became one of the most influential black metal acts. In 1994, he was convicted of murder and arson, and subsequently served 15 years in prison.A native of Bergen, Vikernes spent part of his childhood in Iraq, where his father was working for the Iraqi government. He began playing guitar at the age of 14 and formed his first band, Kalashnikov, within the next two years. After founding Burzum he became part of the early Norwegian black metal scene. In 1992, Vikernes along with other members of the scene were suspected of burning down four Christian churches in Norway. He denied responsibility for the arsons, though he supported them. By early 1993, he had recorded four albums as Burzum and another with fellow black metal band Mayhem.
In August 1993, Vikernes fatally stabbed Mayhem guitarist Euronymous during an altercation at the latter's apartment, and was arrested shortly after. In May 1994, Vikernes was convicted of first-degree murder, church arson and possession of explosives, and sentenced to 21 years in prison. He said the killing was self-defense and unsuccessfully argued for the charge to be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. During his incarceration, Vikernes launched the Norwegian Heathen Front, had two books published, and released two ambient albums as Burzum. Vikernes also started a blog which, in the words of a Rolling Stone writer, "endorsed neo-Nazi views and contains rants against Muslims and Jews". Vikernes openly embraced Nazism during the 1990s; he has since disowned the ideology and its associated movements, although his views remain on the far-right. He calls his beliefs "Odalism" and advocates a "pre-industrial European pagan society".Having served 15 years of his sentence, Vikernes was released on parole in early 2009. He changed his legal name to Louis Cachet to avoid difficulties with the public, but still goes by Varg Vikernes in daily life. After his release, he moved to France with his wife and children, where he has continued his musical and writing career. He was also an active video blogger on his YouTube channel ThuleanPerspective.