Eric Joris (born 1955 in Antwerp, Belgium) is a Belgian multidisciplinary artist and stage director. In 1991 he founded CREW Eric Joris.
He is a multimedia artist with an initial education in filmmaking, covering many areas such as industrial design, graphic design, comics, visual arts, installation art and last but not least performance art. Under his direction CREW Eric Joris adamantly tries to make performances at the melting point between live art and digital media. Eric Joris has studied at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts (Antwerp) (BE) and the Brussels RITS Institute for Media and Film, languages, art history and economy at Sorbonne, (Paris), Cambridge University (United Kingdom), Heidelberg (Collegium Palatinum) and Tokyo (ETP fundings by European Government).Eric Joris develops intriguing methods for connecting state-of-the-art technology with artistic forms, often exploring and questioning the human senses, particularly our perception of sound, movement and space particularly. His company CREW Eric Joris generates live-art projects that can be described as immersive theatre, yet those projects move and shapeshift continuously, always operating on the borders between art and science, or beyond the limit of either.The works of Eric Joris are frequently co-produced and/or sponsored by pioneering institutes for technology, such as Fraunhofer Society and Max Planck Society. He has received eminent prizes and fellowships from the French and Flemish government, as well as from various foundations. CREW Eric Joris is participating in the prestigious program 2020 3D Media, which has secured the backing of the European Commission. CREW is also artistic partner in the EU-funded multidisciplinary research consortium Dreamspace, which develops tools that enable creative professionals to combine live performances, video and computer generated imagery in real time.He is a mentor of the Forecast Platform 2015-2016, an international platform that promotes emerging talents.
Eric Joris currently lives in Antwerp and works in Brussels.