Brandon Bruce Lee (February 1, 1965 – March 31, 1993)  was an American actor and martial artist. He was the only son of martial artist and film star Bruce Lee. As a child from visiting his father's sets, who at the time was a major martial arts film leading man, Lee developed the desire to become an actor. Lee was 8 years old when his father died, becoming an iconic figure of both the art and the film genre he specialized in. Lee pursued his goal of being a thespian, he then studied the craft at the Emerson College and the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute. Wanting to escape his father's image to become a dramatic actor, Lee figured that acting in action oriented films would eventually lead him to other types of roles. After a stint doing local theater, Lee made his screen debut opposite David Carradine in the 1986 ABC's television film Kung Fu: The Movie, a spin-off of the 1970s television series Kung Fu, where he received second billing and starred in his first leading role in Ronny Yu's Hong Kong action film Legacy of Rage that same year.
Shortly after, on television, Lee played a lead in the pilot Kung Fu: The Next Generation (1987), guest starred in an episode of the television series Ohara (1988).  Following this, Lee was the lead in the low budget action film Laser Mission (1989), the US direct to video release of it proved to be financially successful. In the 1990s, he started working with major Hollywood studios and his first American theatrical release was the Warner Bros' buddy cop action film Showdown in Little Tokyo (1991), directed by Mark L. Lester and co-starring Dolph Lundgren. By critics described it as an overwhelmingly silly action film and didn't like it upon release, but found appreciation in retrospective for that same reason. This was followed with the leading role in Dwight H. Little's Rapid Fire (1992) produced by 20th Century Fox, where Lee also did the fight choreography. While some critics liked the film, most felt the script was too simple, however almost all described Lee to be charismatic, in a slick Hollywood action film.
In 1992, he landed his breakthrough role as Eric Draven in Alex Proyas' The Crow (1994), based on the comic book of the same name, which would be his final film.