The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift  is a 2006 American action film directed by Justin Lin, with a screenplay by Chris Morgan. It is the third installment in the Fast & Furious franchise and stars Lucas Black, Sung Kang, Bow Wow, and Brian Tee. The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift follows high school car enthusiast Sean Boswell (Black), who is sent to live in Tokyo with his father, and finds solace in the city's drifting community.
Lin was hired as director due to his work in Better Luck Tomorrow (2002). Unable to secure the returns of any of the series' initial cast members, plans were made by developers to reconsider Tokyo Drift and make it a distinct entry in the franchise, which was achieved by focusing on a car subgenre, incorporating a location outside the United States, and establishing new characters. Subsequently, the chronological timeline of the franchise shifted, with all future installments (until 2015's Furious 7) being set between 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003) and Tokyo Drift.
The film also marks the first to begin the franchise's longtime association with director Justin Lin and writer Chris Morgan, with Lin going onto direct the following three sequels (and is attached to direct two additional future films), while Morgan wrote the next five installments. Casting began in April 2005, and principal photography began in Los Angeles in August 2005, with the majority of the film being shot in Tokyo.
The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift was released in the United States on June 16, 2006. The film achieved some financial success, eventually grossing over $158 million worldwide. However, it is the lowest-grossing film in the franchise. It received generally negative reviews, with critics disliking the screenplay, dialogue and acting. However, it also received positive response for its direction as well as driftng sequences. The fourth film in the series, titled Fast & Furious, was released in April 2009 to box office success, and became the highest-grossing film in the franchise at that point.