The University of Virginia (U.Va. or UVA) is a public research university in Charlottesville, Virginia. It was founded in 1819 by Declaration of Independence author Thomas Jefferson. It is the flagship university of Virginia and home to Jefferson's Academical Village, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. UVA is known for its historic foundations, student-run honor code and secret societies.
The original governing Board of Visitors included Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe. Monroe was the sitting President of the United States at the time of its foundation and earlier Presidents Jefferson and Madison were UVA's first two rectors. Jefferson conceived and designed the original courses of study and original architecture. UVA was the first university of the American South elected to the research-driven Association of American Universities in 1904. More than a century later, the journal Science credited UVA faculty with two of the top ten global scientific breakthroughs of 2015.The University of Virginia offers 121 majors across the eight undergraduate and three professional schools. Its alumni have founded many companies, such as Reddit and CNET, which together produce more than $1.6 trillion in annual revenue and have created 2.3 million jobs. It sits on a historic 1,135-acre (1.8 sq mi; 459.3 ha) central campus partially protected by UNESCO. The university additionally maintains 562 acres north of the campus at UVA Research Park, and 2,913 acres southeast of the city at Morven Farm. Moreover, it manages the College at Wise in Southwest Virginia and until 1972 managed George Mason University and the University of Mary Washington in Northern Virginia.
Virginia student athletes are called Cavaliers and lead the Atlantic Coast Conference in men's team NCAA Championships with 20, ranking third in women's and second in overall NCAA titles. Virginia men's basketball and Virginia men's lacrosse won NCAA Championships in 2019 to join several Cavalier teams in winning recent national championship events including the College Cup, College World Series, and NCAA Tennis Championships. The entire men's program won the Capital One Cup in 2015 and 2019 after leading the nation in overall athletics excellence. Virginia is one of three universities to win the Cup multiple times.