2 Fast 2 Furious  is a 2003 action adventure film directed by John Singleton and written by Michael Brandt and Derek Haas. A standalone sequel to The Fast and the Furious (2001), it is the second installment in the Fast & Furious franchise and stars Paul Walker, Tyrese Gibson, Eva Mendes, Cole Hauser, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, and James Remar. 2 Fast 2 Furious follows Brian O'Conner (Walker) and Roman Pearce (Gibson) who team up to go undercover for the U.S. Customs Service to bring down drug lord Carter Verone (Hauser) in exchange for the erasure of their criminal records.
Plans for a The Fast and the Furious sequel were developed immediately following the box office success of the first entry. Early treatments for a sequel initially featured the returns of both Vin Diesel and Walker, however, the former declined, instead opting to star in The Chronicles of Riddick (2004). As a result of this, Universal Studios delayed the start of filming to allow for script rewrites, which subsequently allowed for the franchise's long-running characters of Roman Pearce and Tej Parker to be introduced.In August 2002, John Singleton, who critically praised the first film, was announced to direct the second in place of Rob Cohen, who left the franchise after directing the previous installment. Principal photography began in Miami in October 2002, with the majority of filming being done on location in Miami and South Florida.2 Fast 2 Furious was released in the United States on June 6, 2003. The film was a commercial success, grossing over $236 million worldwide, quickly becoming the highest-grossing film in the franchise and the 16th highest-grossing film of 2003. It received generally mixed reviews at the time of release, with praise being aimed at the film's action sequences and the performances of Walker and Gibson, but criticism for its storyline and its excessive dialouge, and was nominated for two awards at the 24th Golden Raspberry Awards. In later years, however, the film was reassessed by some critics who noted it as an underrated entry in the franchise. Another standalone sequel, The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift, was released on June 16, 2006.