The Devil Wears Prada is a 2006 American comedy-drama film directed by David Frankel and produced by Wendy Finerman. The screenplay, written by Aline Brosh McKenna, is based on Lauren Weisberger's 2003 novel of the same name. The film adaptation stars Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly, a powerful fashion magazine editor, and Anne Hathaway as Andrea "Andy" Sachs, a college graduate who goes to New York City and lands a job as Priestly's co-assistant. Emily Blunt and Stanley Tucci co-star as co-assistant Emily Charlton and art director Nigel Kipling, respectively. Adrian Grenier, Simon Baker, and Tracie Thoms play key supporting roles.
In 2003, 20th Century Fox bought the rights to a film adaptation of Weisberger's novel before it was completed for publication. However, the project was not greenlit until Streep was cast in the lead role. Principal photography ran for 57 days, primarily taking place in New York from October 2005 to December later that year. Additional filming also occurred in Paris.
After premiering at the LA Film Festival on June 22, 2006, the film was theatrically released in the United States on June 30. The film received positive reviews from critics, with Streep's performance being singled out for praise. This earned her many award nominations, including an Oscar nomination for Best Actress, as well as a Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Comedy or Musical. Hathaway and Blunt also drew favorable reviews and nominations for their performances. The film grossed over $300 million worldwide, against its $41 million budget, and was the 12th highest-grossing film worldwide in 2006.
Although the film is set in the fashion world, most designers and other fashion notables avoided appearing as themselves for fear of displeasing US Vogue editor Anna Wintour, who is widely believed to have been the inspiration for Priestly. Still, many allowed their clothes and accessories to be used in the film, making it one of the most expensively costumed films in history. Wintour later overcame her initial skepticism, saying she liked the film and Streep in particular.