Amerie Mi Marie Rogers (born January 12, 1980), is an American singer, songwriter, author, actress and model. Born in Fitchburg, Massachusetts and raised in the Washington metropolitan area, Amerie gained an appreciation of the classical arts from her mother Mi Suk Rogers and of music from her father Charles Rogers she studied dance from an early age and performed in talent contests. After her High School graduation, her family settled down in Virginia while she began to attend Georgetown University, from which she later graduated with a degree in English and Fine Arts. While living in Washington, D.C., she met producer Rich Harrison, through a friend and later on they eventually met at a nearby McDonald's parking lot after they've exchanged interests. they sat in his car and he started playing some of his work to Amerie and she started to sing some songs that she had written. Amerie began developing demos with Rich that led her to a deal with Rise Entertainment and, in turn, major-label Columbia Records.
In 2003, she helped develop the BET original series The Center, which she also hosted and, during her run as host, accumulated the highest ratings ever for any show in its time slot. Amerie's time on the series was short-lived due to her landing a starring role in the 2004 film First Daughter.In 2005, Amerie released her sophomore album Touch, debuting at number #5 on the US Billboard 200 charts and later receiving 2 Grammy nominations for Best Female R&B Vocal Performance for her signature song 1 Thing (which peaked at number #8 on Billboard Hot 100) as well as Best Contemporary R&B Album. 
In 2007, Amerie released her third album Because I Love It, achieved moderate international success in 2007, although it was not released in North America and she was subsequently bought out of her Sony contract by LA Reid Columbia Records' roster. Amerie released her fourth studio album, In Love & War, in 2009 on Island Def Jam.On May 20, 2016, Amerie independently released an EP, titled Drive. She appeared on Power 105.1's The Breakfast Club and announced she would continue to release music throughout the year. On July 17, 2017, Amerie published her first book via Bloomsbury Publishing titled Because You Love To Hate Me which made it into The New York Times Best Seller list.October 2018 saw the release of the double album, 4AM Mulholland and After 4AM, Amerie's first full-length release in 9 years.