Bermuda () (in full, the Islands of Bermuda) is a British Overseas Territory in the North Atlantic Ocean. It is approximately 1,035.26 km (643 mi) east-southeast of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina (with Cape Point on Hatteras Island being the nearest landfall); 1,236 km (768 mi) south of Cape Sable Island, Nova Scotia;  1,759 km (1,093 mi) northeast of Cuba, and 1,538 km (956 mi) due north of the British Virgin Islands. Though it is typically referred to in the singular, Bermuda consists of 181 islands; the largest of these islands is known as Main Island. The capital city of Bermuda is Hamilton. Bermuda is internally self-governing, with its own constitution and cabinet of ministers selected from the elected Members of the lower house of a Parliament that enacts local laws. As the national government, the Government of the United Kingdom is ultimately responsible for ensuring good governance within British Overseas Territories, and retains responsibility for defence and foreign relations. As of July 2018, it has a population of 71,176, making it the most populous of the British overseas territories.Bermuda's largest economic sectors are offshore insurance, reinsurance, and tourism. Bermuda had one of the world's highest GDP per capita for most of the 20th century. Bermuda's climate is usually described as subtropical, primarily due to the chilly, but generally mild winter temperatures (unlike other areas designates as sub-tropical, summers are also quite mild, with temperatures not rising in most years above 86° F (30° C) during the hottest months of July and August  although there are distinct seasons). It's climate is also oceanic, typical of oceanic islands and also of the western coasts of continents in the Northern Hemisphere (as mean wind direction in the Northern Hemisphere is from the west, hence from the ocean, ensuring relatively high humidity, which stabilises temperature, and acts as a source of heat), which also explains the moderate winters and summers of the British Isles and Wesetern Eurasia generally) and lies in the hurricane belt and thus is prone to related severe weather; however, it is somewhat protected by a coral reef and by its position at the north of the belt, which limits the direction and severity of approaching storms.