Filippina Lydia "Tina" Arena  (born 1 November 1967) is an Australian singer-songwriter, musician, musical theatre actress and record producer. She is one of Australia's highest selling artists and has sold over 10 million records worldwide. Arena is an artist with the vocal range of a soprano and is multilingual: she sings live and records in English, Italian, French and Spanish.
Arena has earned several international and national awards, including seven ARIA Awards, and two World Music Awards for 'Best-selling Australian Artist', which she received in 1996 and in 2000. In 2001, Arena was awarded a BMI Foundation Songwriting Award (Broadcast Music Inc.) by the American performance rights organisation for co-writing "Burn" with Pam Reswick and Steve Werfel. In 2011, Arena became the first Australian to be awarded a Knighthood of the French National Order of National Merit, presented by the President of the French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy, for her contributions to French culture, and ceremonially awarded by Frédéric Mitterrand, the Minister of Culture and Communication of France.In 2015, Arena was inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association ARIA Hall of Fame at the 2015 ARIA Awards ceremony. On Australia Day, 26 January 2016, Arena was recognised in the Australia Day Honours  and appointed a Member in the General Division of the Order of Australia "for significant service to the music industry as a singer, songwriter, and recording artist, and as a supporter of charitable groups." On 27 April 2016, the Governor-General of Australia, Sir Peter Cosgrove, presented Tina Arena with her insignia as a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) at a private ceremony in Paris.In March 2019, the Government of Australia appointed Arena as a board member of the Australia Council for the Arts for a three-year term. The Australia Council for the Arts, informally known as the Australia Council, is the principal arts council or arts funding body of the federal government of Australia.

