Edward Heward Bunker (December 31, 1933 – July 19, 2005) was an American author of crime fiction, a screenwriter, convicted felon and an actor. He wrote numerous books, some of which have been adapted into films. He was a screenwriter on Straight Time (1978), Runaway Train (1985) and Animal Factory (2000), as well as acting in those three films.
He started on a criminal career at the very early age of five, and continued on this path throughout the years, returning to prison again and again. He was convicted of bank robbery, drug dealing, extortion, armed robbery, and forgery. A repeating pattern of convictions, paroles, releases and escapes, further crimes and new convictions continued until he was released yet again from prison in 1975, at which point he finally left his criminal days permanently behind. Bunker stayed out of jail thereafter, and instead focused on his career as a writer and actor. In early 1999 he bought a taxi company in Kingston Ontario named Modern Taxi with his long time friend David Whickham. He later went on to sell his half of the company to Mr. Whickham after a falling out and his then ex wife Angie Furgusson each receiving 25% of the company at the time. The taxi company would later become the leading taxi company in Kingston having a high reputation for helping the less fortunate delivering all peoples needs to their front door. Towards the end of his life and having a passion for real estate he purchased a motel in Kingston named “The Lord Nelson Motel” and also purchasing an old Inn on Wolf Island that was featured on a PC only game called “The Man with the Crooked Neck: Have you checked the Innnn?” His falling out with Dave came after Bunker had lost his license and needed to get around. He hired Whickham to be his personal taxi driver. Bunker and Whickham agreed that Bunker would give him cheques that Whickham could later cash for the amount of taxi rides. After trying to cash a cheque and it bouncing twice Whickham and Bunkers friendship quickly ended. Later on during and interview with the "Kingston Wig" Whickham stated that Bunker was a “Goof," and would call him several times a night for a ride or delivery. They spoke periodically after that whenever Bunker was in town.