Tin Alley is an Australian rock band from Melbourne formed in 2007 by brothers Paul and Jim Siourthas, and Peter Hofbauer.
The band released one studio album, Everyturn (2007). Tin Alley's first single, "In Your Hands", charted consecutively and peaked at number 13 between John Butler and Sneaky Sound System in the Australian indie charts.
In 2009, Tin Alley's release "Out Of Control" reached number 1 on the Australian Music Office charts and was at number 1 on the Australian Independent Record Labels Association charts for five consecutive weeks. In November 2009, "Out Of Control" reached no.7 on the ARIA Australian singles charts and was in the ARIA Charts top 20 for six consecutive weeks. In early 2010, Tin Alley had a special dance version of "Out Of Control" mixed by Luke Chable. In February 2010, the Luke Chable Vs Tin Alley "Out Of Control" dance mix was used on many shows and radio playlisted programs Australia wide. In August 2010, "Out Of Control" was featured and marketed internationally by the fashion company Billabong as part of the 2010 Designers Closet Series.In mid August 2010, Tin Alley released Monster (Pop), a special pop edit taken from the group's original rock version mixed by David Treahearn and Rob Haggett in the UK. Soon after its release, lead singer and guitarist Jim Siourthas left the band for personal reasons.
In July 2011, Stefan Waltersson briefly joined the group and in September Tin Alley released "Ride The Wave", written by Jim Siourthas, Peter Hofbauer & Paul Siourthas, which was voted by the music network as a top ten release (a song recorded the previous year) in Queensland. "Ride The Wave" and "Bounce Back" were later played nationally on commercial play-listed programs.
During the "Bounce Back" release in September 2011, Paul Siourthas signed an endorsement with Australian guitar manufacture Maton. March 2013 saw Andrew Carter join the group to finalise the line up as lead vocalist which then saw the addition of guitarist Kieran Murphy, a member of Carter's previous band.In December 2013 Tin Alley returned to the studio where they recorded The Ghost EP in Queensland. March 2014 saw the group release the first of three tracks under The Ghost EP titled "Chosen Few".

