John Randall Hennigan (born October 3, 1979) is an American professional wrestler, actor, and traceur. He is signed to WWE, where he performs on the SmackDown brand under the ring name John Morrison.
Hennigan was the winner of Tough Enough III, a televised competition that would award the winner a WWE contract, and was assigned to their then developmental territory, Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), to continue his wrestling training. Hennigan was called up to the SmackDown! roster in April 2005 under the ring name Johnny Nitro and on his debut match, Hennigan (as a part of MNM) won the WWE Tag Team Championship. 
After making the main roster, Hennigan won the ECW World Championship once, the Intercontinental Championship three times, and is a six-time world tag team champion (one World Tag Team Championship, four WWE Tag Team Championships, and one SmackDown Tag Team Championship).
After leaving WWE in November 2011, Hennigan began wrestling overseas on the independent circuit under several ring names before finding success in lucha libre wrestling promotions Lucha Underground and Lucha Libre AAA Worldwide as Johnny Mundo. In Lucha Underground, Hennigan was a central fixture throughout all four seasons of the show, winning matches in the first and the final episodes of the promotion's history. He is also the second Triple Crown Champion, having held the Lucha Underground, Gift of the Gods and Trios Championship once each. In AAA, he was the promotion's first-ever triple champion, holding the AAA Mega, Latin American, and World Cruiserweight Championships simultaneously. He also (with partners Chavo Guerrero Jr. and Brian Cage) won the 2016 Lucha Libre World Cup. Hennigan signed with Impact Wrestling in 2017, where he was known as Johnny Impact. He headlined the promotion's 2017 and 2018 Bound for Glory events and won the Impact World Championship once. After leaving the promotion in July 2019, he re-signed with WWE in September that same year.  He is the only wrestler in history to have been the ECW, AAA Mega, Lucha Underground and Impact World Champion.