Jazmine Marie Sullivan (born April 9, 1987) is an American singer-songwriter from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Her debut album, Fearless, was released in 2008 to commercial and critical success. It is certified gold in the US. The album contains her debut single "Need U Bad", produced by Missy Elliott, a reggae-inspired song. A cover version of her second single "Bust Your Windows" that was made on Glee in 2009, boosted her career in the popular culture industry. At the 51st Grammy Awards in 2009, Sullivan received nominations for Best New Artist, Best Female R&B Vocal Performance, Best Traditional R&B Performance, Best R&B Song and Best Contemporary R&B Album.
Sullivan released her second studio album, Love Me Back, in 2010. The album was critically well received and surpassed the success of her debut, earning her another Grammy nomination for Best Female R&B Vocal Performance for the lead single "Holding You Down (Goin' in Circles) at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards in 2011. The album debuted at number 17 on the Billboard 200 chart. She is one of the female R&B artists to have three albums in the top five of the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and have three singles in the top five of Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, as well as in the history of the Grammy Awards to have three simultaneous Grammy-nominated singles, with "Need U Bad", "Bust Your Windows", and "Lions, Tigers & Bears", all of which also topped the charts. Fearless is the longest-running number one album by a female R&B artist in the history of the US Album Charts.
After taking a three-year break, Sullivan announced her third studio album, Reality Show, in 2014. The album was later released on January 13, 2015. It peaked at number one at the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Reality Show was her first studio album to be released under RCA Records and earned her three Grammy Award nominations, including Best R&B Album, and a NAACP Image Award, which was NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song. The lead single, "Let It Burn", became her first song in the US to sell over one digital copies within a week of its release. Her concert tour, The Reality Show Tour, visited North America and concluded with finale concerts at the House of Blues in March 2015.In 2010, Sullivan was named Rising Star by Billboard. At the 2009 and 2016 NAACP Image Awards, Sullivan was nominated for Outstanding New Artist and Outstanding Female Artist. In 2018, her single "Bust Your Windows" was listed at number 140 on National Public Radio's The 200 Greatest Songs By 21st Century Women. Sullivan cites singers Brandy, Changing Faces, Kim Burrell, Lauryn Hill, and Dorinda Clark-Cole as her main influences and inspirations.