Alaina Marie Beaton (born October 1, 1985), known professionally as Porcelain Black, is an American pop singer-songwriter, rapper, and model. At age eighteen, she embarked on her music career as a solo act under the name Porcelain and the Tramps with Virgin Records. However, Black and Virgin could not agree on the music she would record. The music she recorded was posted to her Myspace account, "rockcitynosebleed", where she gained millions of hits. After three years of trying to get out of the contract, she signed with RedOne's Universal Republic imprint, 2101 Records, late in 2009 and began working on her debut album. After many internal problems between the artist and record producer, RedOne, Porcelain Black announced the partnership had come to an end, with anticipation of releasing her debut album in the vein of her Porcelain and the Tramps project in 2015.
She has appeared in multiple music videos, including Jack White's "Freedom at 21" and Travie McCoy's "We'll Be Alright". As a songwriter, she is credited on songs performed by One Direction, Orianthi, The Used and Mexican pop singer Belinda, among others. As a solo act, she has released three singles, "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like", "Naughty Naughty", and "One Woman Army", the first featuring guest vocals from Lil Wayne. The first two songs charted on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart. "One Woman Army" was a top-forty hit in France, Spain, and Wallonia, outselling all of her previous singles in France and becoming her first number-one hit on that country's iTunes chart.
After the release of her first single, Lil Wayne invited her on the second half of his I Am Music Tour as an opening act. She made her first televised appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman, performing "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like". Musically, she fuses industrial themes with pop music conventions such as electronic synths and a heavy reliance upon hooks. She is best known for her guttural vocals and two-toned hair. She considers her music the "love child" of Marilyn Manson and Britney Spears. Vocally compared to Courtney Love, Porcelain Black was approached to record backing vocals for Love's 2008 album.

