The École Nationale Supérieure de l'Aéronautique et de l'Espace (SUPAERO), translated as "National Higher French Institute of Aeronautics and Space", founded in 1909. It is one of the leading prestigious French Grandes écoles in engineering. It is also the world's first dedicated aerospace engineering school and is considered to be one of the best in Europe in that field. The school delivers a range of science and engineering degree programs. ISAE-SUPAERO is part of University of Toulouse, ISSAT, PEGASUS, GEA, Toulouse Tech, CESAER and Aerospace Valley.
Historically ISAE-SUPAERO results from the merger between SUPAERO and ENSICA in the summer of 2007. The aim of this move was to increase the international visibility of SUPAERO and the ENSICA (both of which depend from the French Ministry of Defense), by sharing their faculty and experimental means. In 2011, ISAE founded Groupe ISAE with the engineering school, ENSMA.  In 2012, Groupe ISAE was joined by ESTACA and by l’Ecole de l’Air.
The Institute also delivers continuing education through its subsidiary, EUROSAE.
Since its founding in 1909 ISAE-SUPAERO has produced more than 21,500 graduates; some of them have achieved fame in their field, including: Henri Coandă, the discoverer of the Coanda effect; Henri Ziegler, father of the Airbus program; Frédéric d'Allest, first chairman of Arianespace; and Jean-François Clervoy (class of 1983), astronaut.
The Institute delivers the following educational programs:

The ingénieur ISAE-SUPAERO program,
The joint CNAM-ISAE apprenticeship or co-op program,
An International Masters Program in Aerospace Engineering,
6 Research Masters Programs,
15 Advanced Masters Programs,
6 Doctoral schools,
Continuing education programs.Students accepted into the ingénieur ISAE-SUPAERO program are selected on the basis of their results on the Mines-Ponts competitive exam common to the most selective engineering schools in France. Since 2015, the Institute has been educating these students within the framework of a new common ISAE-SUPAERO engineering curriculum.