Vantage Point is a 2008 American political action thriller film directed by Pete Travis and written by Barry L. Levy. The story focuses on an assassination attempt on the President of the United States, as seen from the various vantage points of different characters. Dennis Quaid, Matthew Fox, Forest Whitaker, William Hurt and Sigourney Weaver star in principal roles. The film is often compared, unfavorably, to Akira Kurosawa's Rashomon, which also employed storytelling through multiple perspectives. Rashomon used the multiple perspectives to question the possibility of truth, in a process called the Rashomon effect; in contrast, Vantage Point recounts a series of events which are re-enacted from several different perspectives and viewpoints to reveal a truthful account of what happened. Vantage Point also explores kidnapping, assassination and terrorism.The film was co-produced by Relativity Media, Original Film, and Art In Motion. It was commercially distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing goes through Columbia Pictures label theatrically, and by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment in home media format. The film project began principal photography in Mexico City on June 18, 2006. On February 26, 2008, the Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released by Varèse Sarabande. The film score was composed by musician Atli Örvarsson.
Following its premiere on February 22, 2008, Vantage Point grossed $72.3 million in US ticket receipts. The film was screened at 3,163 theaters during its widest release nationwide in the United States. It earned an additional $78.9 million in business through international release to top out at a combined $151.2 million in gross revenue. Preceding its theatrical run though, the film received mixed reviews on Metacritic and has a 34% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. The widescreen DVD and high-definition Blu-ray Disc editions of the film featuring the director's audio commentary and interviews with the cast and crew, were both released in the United States on July 8, 2008.

