Mikhail Alexandrovich Bakunin (; 30 May [O.S. 18 May] 1814 – 1 July 1876) was a Russian revolutionary anarchist and founder of collectivist anarchism. He is considered among the most influential figures of anarchism and a major founder of the social anarchist tradition. Bakunin's prestige as an activist also made him one of the most famous ideologues in Europe, gaining substantial influence among radicals throughout Russia and Europe.
Bakunin grew up in Pryamukhino, a family estate in Tver Governorate. From 1840, he studied in Moscow, then in Berlin hoping to enter academia. Later in Paris, he met Karl Marx and the father of anarchism, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who deeply influenced him.
Bakunin's increasing radicalism ended hopes of a professorial career. He was expelled from France for opposing Russia's occupation of Poland. In 1849, he was arrested in Dresden for his participation in the Czech rebellion of 1848 and deported to Russia. There he was imprisoned in Saint Petersburg, then in the Shlisselburg fortress from 1854, then exiled to Siberia in 1857. He escaped via Japan to the United States, then to London where he worked with Alexander Herzen on the journal Kolokol (The Bell). In 1863, he left to join the insurrection in Poland, but failed to reach it and instead spent time in Switzerland and Italy.
In 1868, Bakunin joined the International Working Men's Association, leading an anarchist faction to rapidly grow in influence. The 1872 Hague Congress was dominated by a struggle between Bakunin and Marx. Marx was a key figure in the General Council of the International and argued for the use of the state to bring about socialism; Bakunin and the anarchist faction argued instead for the replacement of the state by federations of self-governing workplaces and communes. Bakunin could not reach the Netherlands and in his absence, the anarchist faction lost and he was expelled for maintaining, in Marx's view, a secret organisation within the International.
From 1870 until his death in 1876, Bakunin wrote his longer works, Statism and Anarchy and God and the State, but continued to directly participate in European worker and peasant movements. In 1870, he was involved in an insurrection in Lyon, France. He sought to take part in an anarchist insurrection in Bologna, Italy, but his declining health forced him to return to Switzerland in disguise.
Bakunin is remembered as a major figure in the history of anarchism, an opponent of Marxism, especially of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and for his predictions that Marxist regimes would be one-party dictatorships over the proletariat, not of the proletariat itself. His book, God and the State, has been widely translated and remains in print. Bakunin continues to influence anarchists such as Noam Chomsky. His biographer Mark Leier wrote that, "Bakunin had a significant influence on later thinkers, ranging from Peter Kropotkin and Errico Malatesta to the Wobblies and Spanish anarchists in the Civil War to Herbert Marcuse, E.P. Thompson, Neil Postman, and A.S. Neill, down to the anarchists gathered these days under the banner of 'anti-globalization.'"