Merengue is a type of music and dance originating in the Dominican Republic , which has become a very popular genre throughout Latin America, and also in several major cities in the United States which Afro-Latino communities.Merengue developed as a music circa the middle of the 19th century of West African stylistic origins and has evolved and reached many different markets since. The genre was later promoted even more by Rafael Trujillo, the dictator from 1930 to 1961, who turned it into national music and dance style of the Dominican Republic. In the United States it was first popularized by New York-based groups and bandleaders like Rafael Petiton Guzman, beginning in the 1930s, and Angel Viloria y su Conjunto Típico Cibaeño in the 1950s. It was during the Trujillo era that the merengue "Compadre Pedro Juan", by Luis Alberti, became an international hit and standardized the 2-part form of the merengue. Merengue music was inscribed by UNESCO on the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of humanityInternationally known Merengue artists and groups include(d): Juan Luis Guerra, Toño Rosario, Fernando Villalona, Carlos Manuel El Zafiro,  Los Hermanos Rosario, Bonny Cepeda, Benny Sadel, Los Toros Band, Sergio Vargas, Eddy Herrera, Wilfrido Vargas, Johnny Ventura, Grupo Rana, Miriam Cruz & Las Chicas Del Can, Joseito Mateo, Luis Ovalles, Angel Viloria, El Cieguito de Nagua, Kinito Mendez, Ravel, Jossie Esteban y la Patrulla 15, Pochy y su Cocoband, Cuco Valoy, The Freddy Kenton Orquestra, Ramón Orlando, Sandy Reyes, July Mateo, Rasputin, Peter Cruz, Alex Bueno, Aramis Camilo, Jochy Hernández, Dioni Fernandez, The New York Band, Anibal Bravo, Conjunto Quisqueya, Olga Tañón, Gisselle, Henry Hierro y La Gran Manzana and Grupomanía. 
The popularity of Merengue has been increasing in Venezuela. Venezuelan Merengueros include Roberto Antonio, Miguel Moly, Natusha, Porfi Jiménez, Billo's Caracas Boys, and Los Melodicos. Merengue is also popular in the coastal city of Guayaquil in Ecuador.  
The new line of Merengue created in New York City has become very popular amongst younger listeners. Known as "Merengue de Mambo," its proponents include: Omega, Oro 24, Los Ficos, Los Gambinos, Alberto Flash, Mala Fe, Henry Jimenez, and Aybar.