Ra.One is a 2011 Indian Hindi-language superhero film directed by Anubhav Sinha and starring Shah Rukh Khan, Armaan Verma, Kareena Kapoor, Arjun Rampal, Shahana Goswami and Tom Wu in pivotal roles. The script, written by Anubhav Sinha and Kanika Dhillon, originated as an idea that Anubhav Sinha got when he saw a television commercial and which he subsequently expanded. The film follows Shekhar Subramanium (Shah Rukh Khan), a game designer who creates a motion sensor-based game in which the antagonist (Ra.One) is more powerful than the protagonist (G.One). The former escapes from the game's virtual world and enters the real world; his aim is to kill Lucifer, the game ID of Shekhar's son and the only player to have challenged Ra.One's power. Relentlessly pursued, the family is forced to bring out G.One from the virtual world to defeat Ra.One and protect them.
Principal photography began in March 2010 and took place in India and the United Kingdom and was overseen by an international crew. The post-production involved 3-D conversion and the application of visual effects, the latter being recognised as a technological breakthrough among Indian films. With a budget of ₹150 crore (equivalent to ₹249 crore or US$35 million in 2019), inclusive of publicity costs, Ra.One was the most expensive Indian film at the time of release surpassing the ₹132 crore (equivalent to ₹238 crore or US$33 million in 2019) budget of Enthiran. The producers spent ₹130 crore (equivalent to ₹216 crore or US$30 million in 2019) out of a ₹52 crore (equivalent to ₹86 crore or US$12 million in 2019) marketing budget, which involved a nine-month publicity campaign, brand tie-ups, merchandise, video games and viral marketing.
The film faced controversies involving plagiarism, content leaks and copyright challenges. Consequently, Ra.One was theatrically released on 26 October 2011, the beginning of the five-day Diwali weekend, in 2D, 3D and dubbed versions in Tamil and Telugu languages, with three international premieres being held between 24 & 26 October 2011. The film witnessed the largest international theatrical release for an Indian film as of 2011, and was preceded by high audience and commercial expectations.
Upon release, Ra.One received mixed to positive reviews, with critics praising the visual effects, action sequences, music, and the performances of Khan and Rampal, but criticising the script, direction, and screenplay. Commercially, the film became the third highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2011 domestically, the second highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2011 worldwide, and broke a number of opening box office records. As the film earned more than ₹207 crores, it was considered a "Hit". The film subsequently won a number of awards for its technical aspects, notably one National Film Award, one Filmfare Award and four International Indian Film Academy Awards.

