Boca Raton ( rə-TOHN), often referred to as simply Boca, is the southernmost city in Palm Beach County, Florida, United States. It was first incorporated on August 2, 1924, as "Bocaratone," and then incorporated as "Boca Raton" in 1925. The 2018 population estimated by the U.S. Census Bureau was 99,244. However, approximately 200,000 people with a Boca Raton postal address live outside its municipal boundaries, in newer developments such as West Boca Raton. As a business center, the city experiences significant daytime population increases. It is one of the wealthiest cities in Florida, with common sights of yachts, private jets, exotic cars, and mansions which are concentrated in the Downtown, Coastal, and Gated Country Club Communities. Boca Raton is 43 miles (69 km) north of Miami and is a principal city of the Miami metropolitan area, which had a population of 6,012,331 people as of 2015.
Boca Raton is home to the main campus of Florida Atlantic University and the corporate headquarters of Office Depot, ADT, Cancer Treatment Centers of America, and Bluegreen Corporation. It is also home to the Evert Tennis Academy, owned by former professional tennis player Chris Evert. Boca Town Center, an upscale shopping center in central Boca Raton, is the largest indoor mall in Palm Beach County. The downtown is centered around Mizner Park.
Many buildings in the area have a Mediterranean Revival or Spanish Colonial Revival architectural theme, initially inspired by Addison Mizner, a resort architect who heavily influenced the city's early development. Still today, Boca Raton has a strict development code for the size and types of commercial buildings, building signs, and advertisements that may be erected within the city limits. No outdoor car dealerships are allowed in the municipality. No billboards are permitted; the city's only billboard was grandfathered in during annexation. The strict development code has led to several major thoroughfares without large signs or advertisements in the traveler's view. However, that regulation does not apply for West Boca Raton which lies outside of city limits. Palm Beach County laws have jurisdiction over that territory.