The Technische Universit채t Darmstadt (Technical University of Darmstadt or unofficially Darmstadt University of Technology), commonly referred to as TU Darmstadt, is a research university in the city of Darmstadt, Germany. It was founded in 1877 and received the right to award doctorates in 1899. In 1882, it was the first university in the world to set up a chair in electrical engineering. In 1883, the university founded the first faculty of electrical engineering and introduced the world's first degree course in electrical engineering. In 2004, it became the first German university to be declared as an autonomous university. TU Darmstadt has assumed a pioneering role in Germany. Computer science, electrical engineering, artificial intelligence, mechatronics, business informatics, political science and many more courses were introduced as scientific disciplines in Germany by Darmstadt faculty.TU Darmstadt founded the IT-Cluster Rhine-Main-Neckar, the "Silicon Valley of Germany". The Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, the Goethe University Frankfurt and the Technische Universit채t Darmstadt together form the Rhine-Main-Universities (RMU). TU Darmstadt is a member of TU9, a network of the most notable German Technische Universit채ten (universities of technology) and of the Top Industrial Managers for Europe network, which allows for student exchanges between leading engineering schools.
According to the German Research Foundation, TU Darmstadt is the best university in Germany for computer science. The university received the highest number of competitive grants in the field of computer science from the German Research Foundation and thus ranked first. TU Darmstadt together with the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence were selected as partner of the German "Federal Government's Artifical Intelligence (AI) Strategy". TU Darmstadt operates the ATHENE, the largest research institute for cybersecurity in Europe.Graduates of TU Darmstadt include Nobel Prize winners, entrepreneurs, managers, billionaires and politicians. As of September 2019, the university is associated with 4 Nobel laureates and 3 Wolf Prize in Physics laureates. For several years, TU Darmstadt has been one of the universities with the most top managers in the German economy. The university is currently among the top 3. The graduates include Oliver Zipse, Peter Gr체nberg, Chaim Weizmann and John Tu. Nobel laureate Albert Einstein recommended this university.Since 2013, 95 companies have been founded in the vicinity of the university.