Scream 4 (stylized as SCRE4M) is a 2011 American slasher film directed by Wes Craven and written by Kevin Williamson. Produced by Outerbanks Entertainment and distributed by Dimension Films, it is the fourth installment in the Scream film series. The film stars David Arquette, Neve Campbell, Courteney Cox, Emma Roberts, Hayden Panettiere, Anthony Anderson, Alison Brie, Adam Brody, Rory Culkin, Marielle Jaffe, Erik Knudsen, Mary McDonnell, Marley Shelton, and Nico Tortorella. The film takes place on the fifteenth anniversary of the original Woodsboro murders and involves Sidney Prescott returning to the town after ten years, where Ghostface once again begins killing students from Woodsboro High. Like its predecessors, Scream 4 combines the violence of the slasher genre with elements of black comedy and "whodunit" mystery to satirize the clichés of film remakes. The film also provides a commentary on the extensive usage of social media and the obsession of internet fame.
The series was originally intended to be a trilogy, concluding with Scream 3 in 2000. However, in June 2008, The Weinstein Company announced a fourth sequel was in development, with Craven confirmed to return in March 2010. Principal photography took place from June to September 2010, taking place in and around Ann Arbor, Michigan. During production, Ehren Kruger, who previously wrote the screenplay for Scream 3, was hired for script rewrites. Reshoots were filmed in early 2011, following test screenings.
Scream 4 was released on April 15, 2011, and grossed $97 million worldwide on a budget of $40 million, becoming the lowest-grossing film in the Scream franchise. It received mixed reviews from critics, with praise going towards the performances, direction and humor, and criticism for its lack of scares and reliance on clichéd formulas. However, many considered it to be an improvement over its predecessor. Scream 4 was the final film to be directed by Craven before his death in 2015. It was followed by an anthology television series, developed for MTV, without the involvement of Williamson, Arquette, Campbell or Cox, although Roger L. Jackson returned to voice Ghostface in the third season.