Jeanette Biedermann (born February 22, 1980) is a German singer, songwriter, actress, and television personality. Born and raised in the greater Berlin area, Biedermann began performing as a member of a troupe of acrobats in a children's circus at the age of six. She later attended beauty school before dropping out to pursue her music career following her participation and win of the Bild-Schlagerwettbewerb competition in 1998. The following year, Biedermann placed fourth in the national final for the Eurovision Song Contest, and was propelled to stardom when she was cast in a main role in the soap opera Gute Zeiten, schlechte Zeiten. In 2000, Biedermann made her musical breakthrough with her first two full English-language albums Enjoy! (2000) and Delicious (2001).
Trying to reinvent her image, Biedermann shifted to pop rock music for her next albums, Rock My Life (2002), Break On Through (2003) and Naked Truth (2006). Following her departure from GZSZ and a longer hiatus, she had a starring role in the telenovela Anna und die Liebe and released her dance pop-led album Undress to the Beat (2009), which was less successful commercially and led to a decline in her musical career. In 2012, Biedermann became the lead singer of the German language group Ewig which eventually disbanded in 2019. The same year, she appeared in the sixth season of Sing meinen Song - Das Tauschkonzert, the German version of the Best Singers series, and announced the release of her eighth solo effort DNA (2019).
Lending her musical knowledge to others, Biedermann served as a member of the judging panel of reality television competition series such as Star Search and Stars auf Ice in 2003 and 2006, respectively. Since, she has also starred in various films, theatrical projects, and television shows, including crime series Tatort (2006) and spoofing film Dörte's Dancing (2008). With album and single sales in excess of ten million copies, Biedermann is ranked among the highest-selling German music artists to emerge in the early 2000s. Her contributions to the music industry have garnered her numerous achievements including two ECHO Awards, a Goldene Kamera and a Top of the Pops Award.