The New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) is a public research university (R1) in Newark, New Jersey. Founded in 1881 with the support of local industrialists and inventors especially Edward Weston,  NJIT opened as Newark Technical School in 1885 with 88 students. The school grew into a classic engineering college – Newark College of Engineering – and then, with the addition of a School of Architecture in 1973, into a polytechnic university that now hosts five colleges and one school. As of fall 2019, the university enrolls about 11,500 students, 2,000 of whom live on campus.NJIT offers 52 undergraduate (Bachelor of Science/Arts) majors and 67 graduate (Masters and PhD) programs. Via its Honors College it also offers professional programs in Healthcare and Law in collaboration with nearby institutions including Rutgers Medical School and Seton Hall Law School. The university also offers cross-registration with Rutgers University-Newark which borders its campus. NJIT operates two major off-campus research facilities including the Big Bear Solar Observatory and the Owens Valley Radio Observatory.
As of May 2019 the school's faculty and alumni include a Turing Award winner (2011), a Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics winner (2015), 2 members of the National Inventors Hall of Fame, 8 members of the National Academy of Engineering, 1 member of the National Academy of Sciences, an astronaut, a National Medal of Technology winner, a Congressional Gold Medal winner, a William Bowie Medal winner, multiple IEEE medalists, and 9 members of the National Academy of Inventors including 2 senior members. To date NJIT graduates have won twelve Goldwaters, four Fulbrights, a Boren Scholarship, a Truman, two Whitakers, eight Gilmans, and eleven NSF Graduate Research Fellowships.NJIT is a member of the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities, a Sea Grant College, and a member of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture. It has participated in the McNair Scholars Program since 1999. With 19 varsity teams, the NCAA Division I "Highlanders" mainly compete in the Atlantic Sun Conference.