Derek Richard Grant (sometimes known as Derek R. Grant) is an American musician, singer and songwriter best known as the third and current drummer for punk rock band Alkaline Trio, having joined the band in 2001. He is also a member of Chicago "supergroup" Dead Ending.  He was previously a member of The Suicide Machines, Telegraph, Gyga, Thoughts of Ionesco, Remainder, Walls of Jericho, The Exceptions and Broken Spoke. In addition to playing the drums, Grant is a talented guitarist and vocalist, and has filled in as guitarist for both Face to Face (1998) and The Gaslight Anthem (October 2008).
He has frequently filled in on drums for Josh Freese on many Vandals Tours since 1998, and with Good Charlotte during the later half of 2004.
In September 2008, Derek released an 8-song album free via his MySpace page entitled D.Grant Meets the Reaper which is a collaboration with his 12-year-old alter ego.  The songs were written between the ages of 11–14, and feature Derek at age 12 on vocals, with newly re-recorded music.
In February 2009 Derek released a three-song EP free via his Myspace page entitled The Purple Trilogy.  This material, recorded by Derek (with help from Saves the Day guitarist Arun Bali) is described as "Electro-Funk" and features a cover of an unreleased Prince track ("Electric Intercourse"), and two original compositions.
In October 2014 Derek released a digital single for "Love is a Bad Dream", a track from his forthcoming debut solo album.  It was backed with the non-album track "Don't Marry Me".
In January 2015 Derek released his album, Break Down, through Red Scare Industries.  It contains eight songs, written and recorded in 2008/2009.  All instruments on the album are played by Derek.
In May 2015 Derek released a 7-inch with Australian singer-songwriter Dan Cribb, through Pee Records. The physical release contained two songs each, with an additional one-song each released digitally. It was mixed by The Swellers frontman Nick Diener at Oneder Studios in Michigan who also played bass and guitar and sung on Dan's songs.
In 2017 Derek reunited with Detroit post-hardcore band Thoughts of Ionesco to record an EP, Skar Cymbals. The band also performed their first concert in over seventeen years in Detroit, MI.