Roderick James Nugent Stewart  (born 3 January 1973), known as Rory Stewart, is a British diplomat, author, writer and politician. He served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Penrith and The Border from 2010 to 2019 and was international development secretary in 2019. First elected as a Conservative, Stewart had the party whip removed in September 2019 and subsequently sat as an independent.
After education at the Dragon School, Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, Stewart became a diplomat, working in Indonesia and Montenegro. He left the civil service to undertake a two-year walk across Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, India and Nepal. He later wrote a best-selling book, The Places in Between, about his experiences. He subsequently served as a deputy governor for the Coalition Provisional Authority following the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and wrote a second book covering this period, Occupational Hazards or The Prince of the Marshes. He later lectured at Harvard and worked for several non-governmental organisations, including as executive chairman of the Turquoise Mountain Foundation.
In 2009, Stewart joined the Conservative Party and was selected as the parliamentary candidate for Penrith and The Border. He was elected to the House of Commons the following year, and was later elected as chair of the Defence Select Committee. In 2015, he was appointed to the Cameron Government as minister for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. From 2016 to 2019, Stewart served in the May Government as international development minister, Africa minister, and prisons minister. In 2019, he was promoted to the cabinet as international development secretary. Stewart stood as a candidate for leader of the Conservative Party in the 2019 leadership contest, finishing fifth.
On 3 October 2019, Stewart announced he had resigned from the Conservative Party and that he would stand down as an MP at the next general election. He is now an independent candidate in the 2021 London mayoral election.

