Brigham Young University (BYU, sometimes referred to colloquially as The Y) is a private research university located in Provo, Utah and owned by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).  The university is run under the auspices of its parent-organization, the Church Educational System (CES), and is classified among "Doctoral Universities: High Research Activity" with "more selective, lower transfer-in" admissions.   The university's primary emphasis is on undergraduate education in 179 majors, but it also has 62 master's and 26 doctoral degree programs.  The university also administers two satellite campuses, one in Jerusalem and one in Salt Lake City.
Students attending BYU agree to follow an honor code that mandates behavior in line with LDS teachings, such as academic honesty, adherence to dress and grooming standards, abstinence from extramarital sex and homosexual behavior, and no consumption of illegal drugs, coffee, tea, alcohol, or tobacco.  Approximately 99 percent of the students are members of the LDS Church. The university curriculum includes religious education, with required courses in the Bible (KJV), LDS scripture, doctrine, and history, and the university sponsors weekly devotional assemblies with most speakers addressing religious topics. Sixty-six percent of students either delay enrollment or take a hiatus from their studies to serve as LDS missionaries. An education at BYU is less expensive than at similar private universities, since "a significant portion" of the cost of operating the university is subsidized by the church's tithing funds.BYU's athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are collectively known as the Cougars. Their college football team is an NCAA Division I Independent, while their other sports teams compete in either the West Coast Conference or Mountain Pacific Sports Federation.  BYU's sports teams have won a total of nine NCAA national championships and were named National Champions in football by multiple publications in 1984.