Georgetown University is a private research university in the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington, D.C. Founded by Bishop John Carroll in 1789 as Georgetown College, the university has grown to comprise ten undergraduate and graduate schools, among which are the School of Foreign Service, School of Business, Medical School, Law School, and a campus in Qatar. Located on a hill above the Potomac River, the school's main campus is identifiable by its flagship Healy Hall, a National Historic Landmark.
Georgetown is the oldest Catholic and Jesuit institution of higher education in the United States. The Jesuits have participated in the university's academic life, both as scholars and as administrators, since 1805. However, the university has always been governed independently of the church, and the majority of Georgetown students are not Catholic.Georgetown is a highly selective school, accepting 15 percent of undergraduate applicants for its class of 2024. The university offers degree programs in forty-eight disciplines, enrolling an average of 7,500 undergraduate and 10,000 post-graduate students from more than 135 countries. Georgetown's notable alumni include 26 Rhodes Scholars, 21 Marshall Scholars, U.S. Presidents, billionaires, and U.S. Supreme Court Justices, as well as international royalty and heads of state. The school produces more U.S. diplomats than any other university and is among the top producers of members of the United States Congress. Georgetown is also a top feeder school for careers in finance and investment banking on Wall Street.Georgetown is home to the country's largest student-run business, largest student-run financial institution, the oldest continuously running student theatre troupe, and one of the oldest debating societies in the United States. The school's athletic teams are nicknamed the Hoyas and include a men's basketball team that has won a record-tying seven Big East championships, appeared in five Final Fours, and won a national championship in 1984. The university also has a co-ed sailing team that holds thirteen national championships and one world championship title.