Nasser David Khalili (Persian: ناصر داوود خلیلی‎, born 18 December 1945) is a British-Iranian scholar, collector, and philanthropist based in London. He is a British citizen. Khalili is the founder of the Khalili Collections, which is said to include the finest and most comprehensive collection of Islamic art in private hands. Khalili was born in Iran, before leaving the country to study in the United States. He graduated from Queens College, City University of New York in 1974 with a computer science degree. He later received a PhD degree in Islamic art in 1988, from the School of Oriental and African Studies, London, writing his thesis on Islamic lacquerware.
He first started to collect art in New York during the 1970s, while also spending a lot of time in London investing in property during the 1980s. Over the coming decades, Khalili created eight distinct art collections under the auspices of the Khalili Family Trust. Khalili is said to have initially generated capital in the 1980s through the sale of a company and also venture capital. Since then his wealth has grown substantially, which he stated in an interview was due to "dealing in art, commodities and real estate". Khalili is known for the purchase of a number of large properties in London. One of his properties in Kensington Palace Gardens, was sold to Bernie Ecclestone for £57 million. He was also the co-owner of Sixty London on Holborn Viaduct, London. It is currently leased by Amazon as their London office.
In 1995, he founded the Maimonides Interfaith Foundation where he serves as Chairman. Khalili is a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador and has addressed a number of high-level dignitaries on behalf of the United Nations and UNESCO. He is also a trustee of the City of Jerusalem and has received knighthoods from two Popes.Many commentators have drawn up different values for his works over the years, many valuations were made without public knowledge of what the collections contained. More accurate values have been published more recently after publications and exhibitions demonstrated what the collections contained.When asked about his collections and wealth, Khalili stated in an interview that he "took it upon himself to buy everything that was available...I found things that belonged to a great heritage that was just sitting there unnoticed...They were displaced from history and deserved to be preserved and recognised".