The Cleveland Show is  an American animated sitcom created by Seth MacFarlane, Richard Appel, and Mike Henry for the Fox Broadcasting Company as a spin-off of Family Guy. The series centered on the Browns and Tubbs, two dysfunctional families consisting of parents Cleveland Brown and Donna Tubbs and their children Cleveland Brown Jr., Roberta Tubbs, and Rallo Tubbs. Similar to Family Guy, it exhibited much of its humor in the form of cutaway gags that often lampoon American culture, though it uses significantly less than Family Guy.
The series was conceived by MacFarlane in 2007 after developing the two animated series Family Guy and American Dad! for the Fox network. MacFarlane centered the show on Family Guy character Cleveland Brown, his new wife Donna Tubbs, his step-children Rallo and Roberta Tubbs, and his son Cleveland, Jr., who, in the show, is depicted as an obese, soft-spoken teen, as opposed to his depiction as a younger, hyperactive child with average body weight on Family Guy.
The series originally aired from September 27, 2009, to May 19, 2013, for a total of four seasons and 88 episodes. The Cleveland Show was nominated for one Annie Award, one Primetime Emmy Award, and two Teen Choice Awards, but received mixed reviews from media critics. The series was canceled after its fourth season. Cleveland has since returned to Family Guy, accompanied by the rest of the Brown-Tubbs family, as of the twelfth season episode "He's Bla-ack!".
In July 2010, the Turner Broadcasting System picked up syndication rights, for their networks TBS and Adult Swim. The series first aired in syndication on Adult Swim on Cartoon Network in the United States on September 29, 2012 and on MuchMusic in Canada on September 2, 2013. Although the series was considered a TBS series, the series was broadcast on Adult Swim and MuchMusic. On September 9, 2018, the series stopped airing on Adult Swim and TBS in the United States. On August 31, 2017, the series stopped airing on MuchMusic in Canada. On July 14, 2018, Comedy Central picked up the rights to the series and it began airing on Comedy Central in the United States on October 8, 2018 and moved to Teletoon at Night in Canada on September 1, 2018.