Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań (Polish: Uniwersytet im. Adama Mickiewicza w Poznaniu; Latin: Universitas Studiorum Mickiewicziana Posnaniensis) is a research university in Poznań, Poland.
It traces its origins to 1611, when under the Royal Charter granted by King Sigismund III Vasa, the Jesuit College became the first university in Poznań. The inauguration ceremony of the newly founded institution took place on May 7, 1919 that is 308 years after it was formally established by the Polish king and 400th anniversary of the foundation of the Lubrański Academy which is considered its predecessor. Its original name was Piast University (Polish: Wszechnica Piastowska), which later in 1920 was renamed to University of Poznań (Polish: Uniwersytet Poznański). Staff and students of the Polish university, some of them expelled by Germans to Warsaw, opened an underground Polish University of the Western Lands (Polish: Uniwersytet Ziem Zachodnich). In 1955 University of Poznań adopted a new patron, the 19th-century Polish Romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz, and changed to its current name.Notable alumni and academic staff include cryptologists, Marian Rejewski, Jerzy Różycki and Henryk Zygalski, jurist Bohdan Winiarski, legal theoretician Sławomira Wronkowska-Jaśkiewicz, philosopher Leszek Nowak, sociologist Florian Znaniecki. Many AMU alumni are leaders and innovators in the business world, as well as prominents in society and the arts. Its graduates include journalist and public intellectual Adam Michnik, bllionaire Jan Kulczyk and his former wife Grażyna Kulczyk, Academy Award winning composer Jan A. P. Kaczmarek, theatre director Lech Raczak, film director Filip Bajon and a music critic Jerzy Waldorff.
The university is organized into six principal academic units—five research schools consisting of twenty faculties and the doctoral school—with campuses throughout the Old Town and Morasko. The university employs roughly 4,000 academics, and has more than 40,000 students who study in some 80 disciplines. More than half of the student body are women. The language of instruction is usually Polish, although several degrees are offered in either German or English. The university library is one of Poland's largest, and houses one of the largest Masonic collections, including the 1723 edition of James Anderson's The Constitutions of the Free-Masons.Due to its history, university is traditionally considered Poland's most reputable institution of higher learning, this standing equally being reflected in national rankings. Adam Mickiewicz University is a member of the European University Association and SGroup.
In 2018, the Academic Ranking of World Universities placed the university within the 701-800 band globally.