Trygve Emanuel Gulbranssen (baptized Trygve Emanuel Gulbrandsen; 15 June 1894 – 10 October 1962) was a Norwegian novelist, businessman and journalist.
Gulbranssen is best known for writing the Bjørndal Trilogy – Og bakom synger skogene (1933), published in English as Beyond Sing the Woods; and Det blåser fra Dauingfjell (1934) and Ingen vei går utenom (1935), collectively translated under the English title The Wind from the Mountains. His books were well received by critics and readers alike, and they have been translated into over 30 languages and sold more than 12 million copies. At one point prior to the outbreak of World War II, the popularity of the Trilogy made Gulbranssen the fourth-bestselling author worldwide, and the success of the American editions of his work secured for him the distinction of being the only Scandinavian author of fiction to be included in the prestigious List of Books Chosen for the White House – a collection of works of literature selected by U.S. publishers and presented to the White House in order to provide the president with a library of the very best in contemporary literature. His novels were later adapted for film, though he was disappointed with the results.He was also well known as a sports journalist, writing primarily for the magazine Idrætsliv (Sports Life), which he produced together with Peder Christian Andersen and Einar Staff. He wrote many of his most famous and characteristic articles as a correspondent for Idrætsliv and Aftenposten during the Summer Olympics in the years between 1920 and 1936.  He took a particular interest in track and field and sought to promote it as a sports manager for many years. He is also regarded – together with Nils Dahl – as the first person to have introduced orienteering to Norway.Gulbranssen's primary profession was tobacconist; in association with his business partners he imported tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other items. The wholesale business he was a member of became the largest of its type in Norway under his leadership. He was a respected business man both inside and outside of Norway's borders, and he established many lifelong friendships during the course of his business trips around Europe.
In 1940, Gulbranssen moved with his family to a farm in Eidsberg, allowing him to realize his dream of being a farmer, and even though he did not personally participate in the daily chores, he invested a great deal of effort in the planning and management of the enterprise. Although he was a newcomer to the district, he did not isolate himself on the farm, and he maintained a good relationship with his neighbors. In 1955 he helped found the Mysen Rotary Club, where he actively participated as a charter member until his death in 1962.