St. Louis () is an independent city in Missouri. It is the largest metropolitan area in the state of Missouri; however, the independent city of St. Louis is the second largest city in Missouri, behind Kansas City. It is situated along the western bank of the Mississippi River, which forms the state line between Illinois and Missouri. The Missouri River merges with the Mississippi River 15 river miles north of Downtown St. Louis, forming the fourth longest river system in the world. The estimated 2018 population of the city proper was 302,838 and the bi-state metropolitan area was 2,804,724. Greater St. Louis is the largest metropolitan area in Missouri, second-largest in Illinois, seventh-largest in the Great Lakes Megalopolis, and the 20th-largest in the United States.
Before European settlement, the area was a regional center of Native American Mississippian culture. The city of St. Louis was founded in 1764 by French fur traders Pierre Laclède and Auguste Chouteau, and named after Louis IX of France. In 1764, following France's defeat in the Seven Years' War, the area was ceded to Spain and retroceded back to France in 1800. In 1803, the United States acquired the territory as part of the Louisiana Purchase. During the 19th century, St. Louis became a major port on the Mississippi River; at the time of the 1870 Census, it was the fourth largest city in the country. It separated from St. Louis County in 1877, becoming an independent city and limiting its own political boundaries. In 1904, it hosted the Louisiana Purchase Exposition and the Summer Olympics.
A "Gamma" global city with a metropolitan GDP of more than $160 billion in 2017, metropolitan St. Louis's diverse economy has strengths in the service, manufacturing, trade, transportation, and tourism industries. The metropolitan area is home to nine of the ten Fortune 500 companies based in Missouri. Major companies headquartered or with significant operations within the city proper include Ameren Corporation, Peabody Energy, Nestlé Purina PetCare, Anheuser-Busch InBev, Wells Fargo Advisors, Stifel Financial, Spire, Inc., MilliporeSigma, FleishmanHillard, Square, Inc., U.S. Bank, Anthem BlueCross and Blue Shield, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, and AT&T.
Major research universities within the city proper include St. Louis University and a small portion of the east end of the main campus of Washington University in St. Louis, with the majority of the main campus located in unincorporated St. Louis County and Clayton. The Washington University Medical Center, located in the Central West End neighborhood, hosts an agglomeration of medical and pharmaceutical institutions, including the Barnes-Jewish Hospital.
St. Louis has three professional sports teams: the St. Louis Cardinals of Major League Baseball, the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League, and the St. Louis BattleHawks of the XFL. In 2019, the city was awarded a Major League Soccer franchise, which will begin play upon the completion of a 22,500-seat stadium in the city's Downtown West neighborhood in 2022. Among the city's notable sights is the 630-foot (192 m) Gateway Arch in the downtown area. St. Louis is also home to the St. Louis Zoo, ranked as one of the nation's best, and the Missouri Botanical Garden, with the second largest herbarium in North America.