Linezolid is an antibiotic used for the treatment of infections caused by Gram-positive bacteria that are resistant to other antibiotics. Linezolid is active against most Gram-positive bacteria that cause disease, including streptococci, vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The main uses are infections of the skin and pneumonia although it may be used for a variety of other infections including drug-resistant tuberculosis. It is used either by injection into a vein or by mouth.When given for short periods, linezolid is a relatively safe antibiotic. It can be used in people of all ages and in people with liver disease or poor kidney function. Common side effects with short-term use include headache, diarrhea, rash, and nausea. Serious side effects may include serotonin syndrome, bone marrow suppression, and high blood lactate levels, particularly when used for more than two weeks. If used for longer periods it may cause  nerve damage, including optic nerve damage, which may be irreversible.As a protein synthesis inhibitor, linezolid works by suppressing bacterial protein production. This either stops growth or results in bacterial death. Although many antibiotics work this way, the exact mechanism of action of linezolid appears to be unique in that it blocks the initiation of protein production, rather than one of the later steps. As of 2014, bacterial resistance to linezolid has remained low. Linezolid is a member of the oxazolidinone class of medications.Linezolid was discovered in the mid 1990s, and was approved for commercial use in 2000. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, the safest and most effective medicines needed in a health system. Linezolid is available as a generic medication. The wholesale cost in the developing world is about US$2.90 per day, while that in the United States in 2016 was about US$13.79 per day. It appears to be more cost-effective than alternatives such as vancomycin, mostly because of the ability to switch from intravenous use to administration by mouth sooner.