Chung-Ang University (also known as CAU; lit. Central University) is a private comprehensive research university in South Korea.
Starting as a church-run kindergarten in 1918, CAU transformed into a school for female kindergarten teachers in 1922 and was granted university status in 1953. The university claims 2018 to be its centennial. It has 33,600 undergraduates, 5,200 graduates, 700 professors and 500 more part-time teaching staff.CAU is the first in South Korea to offer courses in Pharmacy, Business Management, Public Administration, Mass Communication, Advertising & Public Relations, Urban Planning and Real Estate, Energy System Engineering, Sociology, Psychology on the Seoul campus. Urban Planning and Real Estate and Energy System Engineering were newly established majors beginning in 2014. At the second campus, Ansung Campus, there are majors such as Creative Writing, Photography, and Drama & Film Studies, and is active in Pharmacy, Media and the Arts. There is also a major called City and Area Planning at the second campus.
Established in 1918, CAU has endured through the painful course of Korea's modern history, upholding its ideal of “Truth and Justice”. Since then, CAU has taken a leading role in nurturing intellectuals of the nation. Respected as leading institution providing quality education, CAU has sped up the pace of innovation in local education.
Furthermore, CAU is recognized as the nation's best in the fields of pharmacy, culture and art education. With the help of its schools of art and culture, the university stands at the center of the Korean culture wave, currently sweeping Asia and beyond.
The symbol of Central University is Blue Dragon. The blue dragon statue represents the dragon to the universe toward the outer world by ascending and ascending the earth with the dragon blessed. Blue Dragon, a symbol of divine, majestic and prosperous, represents the sacredness, authority and freedom of the university and means the eternal prosperity of Chung Ang University. In addition, each part of the Blue Dragon Prize is a source of greatness, exploration of truth, class polishing, school development and prosperity of space exploration.[1]

