The Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) is the founding and ruling communist party of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Although it nominally exists alongside the Vietnamese Fatherland Front, it maintains a unitary government and has centralised control over the state, military and media. The supremacy of the Communist Party is guaranteed by Article 4 of the national constitution. The CPV was founded in 1930 by Hồ Chí Minh; since 1954, it has been the only legal party in the country alongside the former South Vietnam when it took over in 1976 at the end of the Vietnam War. It also controls the military, the People's Army of Vietnam.
The CPV is organized on the basis of democratic centralism, a principle conceived by Russian Marxist theoretician Vladimir Lenin which entails democratic and open discussion on policy on the condition of unity in upholding the agreed upon policies. The highest institution of the CPV is the party's National Congress which elects the Central Committee. In between party congresses, the Central Committee is the supreme organ on party affairs. Immediately after a party congress, the Central Committee elects the Politburo and Secretariat and it appoints the First Secretary, the highest party office. In between sessions of the Central Committee, the Politburo is the supreme organ on party affairs. However, it can only implement decisions based upon the policies which have been approved in advance by either the Central Committee or the party's National Congress. As of 2017, the 12th Politburo comprises 19 members. The current party's leader is Nguyễn Phú Trọng, who holds the titles of General Secretary of the Central Committee, Secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the presidency of Vietnam.
The party is committed to communism and continues to participate in the International Meeting of Communist and Workers' Parties each year. It is also known for the advocacy of what it calls a "socialist-oriented market economy" while another ideology of CPV, the Ho Chi Minh Thought, introduced by Ho which combines Vietnamese culture, French revolutionary ideas, liberal ideas, Marxist–Leninist communist ideals and Ho Chi Minh's personal qualities. In most of the cases, the Vietnamese press and people refer to the Communist Party of Vietnam as Đảng ("Party") or Đảng ta ("our Party").