The Han Chinese, Hanzu, Han people  (UK: ; US: ; simplified Chinese: 汉人; traditional Chinese: 漢人; pinyin: Hànrén; literally: 'Han people' or simplified Chinese: 汉族; traditional Chinese: 漢族; pinyin: Hànzú; literally: 'Han ethnicity'), are an East Asian ethnic group and nation. They constitute the world's largest ethnic group, making up about 18% of the global population, and consist of various subgroups speaking distinctive varieties of Chinese languages. The estimated 1.3 billion Han Chinese people are mostly concentrated in mainland China, where they make up about 92 percent of the total population. In Taiwan they make up about 95% of the population. People of Han Chinese descent also make up around 75% of the total population of Singapore.The Han Chinese trace a common ancestry to the Huaxia, a name for the initial confederation of agricultural tribes living along the Yellow River. The term Huaxia represents the collective Neolithic confederation of agricultural tribes Hua and Xia who settled along the Central Plains around the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River in northern China. The two tribes were the ancestors of the modern Han Chinese people that gave birth to Chinese civilization. In addition, the term Huaxia (literally "the civilized Xia people") was distinctively used to represent a civilized ethnic group in contrast to what was perceived as barbaric peoples around them.In many overseas Chinese communities, the term Hua Ren (华人; 華人; Huárén), Hua Qiao (华侨; 華僑; Huáqiáo) or Hua Zu (华族; 華族; Huázú) may be used for people of Han Chinese ethnicity as distinct from Zhongguo Ren (中国人; 中國人) which also refers to citizens of China, including people of non-Han ethnicity. Han people (汉人; 漢人; Hànrén) may also be used for people of ethnic Chinese descent around the world.The Han Chinese are bound together with a shared history inhabiting an ancient ancestral territory for over four thousand years, deeply rooted with many different cultural traditions and customs. The Huaxia tribes in northern China experienced a continuous expansion into southern China over the past two millennia. Huaxia culture spread southward from its heartland in the Yellow River Basin, absorbing various non-Chinese ethnic groups that became sinicised over the centuries at various points in China's history.The Han dynasty is considered to be one of the first great eras in Chinese history, as it made China the major regional power in East Asia and projected much of its influence on its neighbours while rivalling the Roman Empire in population size and geographical reach. The Han dynasty's prestige and prominence influenced many of the ancient Huaxia to begin identifying themselves as "The People of Han". To this day, the Han Chinese have since taken their ethnic name from this dynasty, and the Chinese script is referred to as "Han characters".

