Keanu Charles Reeves ( kee-AH-noo; born September 2, 1964) is a Canadian actor, musician, film producer and director. Born in Beirut, Reeves grew up in Toronto, Ontario. He started acting in theatre productions, and in television films before making his mainstream film debut in Youngblood (1986). Reeves gained recognition in his breakthrough role as Ted "Theodore" Logan in the science fiction comedy Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure (1989). This was followed by a supporting role in Ron Howard's comedy Parenthood, 1991's action film Point Break, sequel Bill & Ted's Bogus Journey, and the independent drama My Own Private Idaho. For playing a street hustler in the last of these, Reeves was critically praised for his performance. He had a supporting role in Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992), which was nominated for four Academy Awards. 
The action thriller Speed (1994), in which Reeves was cast as a police officer, garnered critical and commercial success, and helped Reeves gain further recognition. He followed this with a series of films that failed at the box office, including Johnny Mnemonic (1995), Chain Reaction (1996), and The Last Time I Committed Suicide (1997). However, his performance in the supernatural horror The Devil's Advocate (1997) was well received. Global stardom followed soon after with his lead role as computer hacker Neo in the science fiction thriller The Matrix (1999). The film was a commercial success and won four Academy Awards. He reprised the role in its sequels, The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions (both 2003), both of which were met with mixed reception. In 2005, Reeves played exorcist John Constantine in Constantine and a dentist in the comedy-drama Thumbsucker. He also starred in the animated A Scanner Darkly (2006), romantic drama The Lake House (2006), science fiction thriller The Day the Earth Stood Still (2008), and the crime thriller Street Kings (2008). 
In 2013, he made his directorial debut with Man of Tai Chi, which garnered warm reception but was a box-office bomb. In 2014, Reeves played the titular assassin in the neo-noir action thriller John Wick, which was a commercial success and was generally well-received. A year later, he starred in Knock Knock and narrated two documentaries, Deep Web and Mifune: The Last Samurai. 2016 saw Reeves star in five films, including The Neon Demon, The Bad Batch, and The Whole Truth. He also starred in a web television series Swedish Dicks. He returned to the John Wick franchise in the commercially successful sequels, John Wick: Chapter 2 (2017), and John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum (2019). In 2019, Reeves voiced a character in Toy Story 4 (2019). Reeves has spent most of his career typecast as the action hero; "saving the world" is a recurring character arc in many roles he has portrayed, such as the characters of Ted "Theodore" Logan, Gautama Buddha, Neo, Johnny Mnemonic, John Constantine, and Klaatu. He played bass guitar for the band Dogstar, and pursued other endeavors such as writing.