Christopher Keith Irvine (born November 9, 1970), better known by his ring name Chris Jericho, is an American-Canadian professional wrestler, musician, podcaster, author, actor, and entrepreneur, currently signed to both All Elite Wrestling (AEW) and New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW). In professional wrestling, he is also well known for appearances in WWE between 1999 and 2018. Noted for his over-the-top, rock star persona, Jericho has been named by journalists and industry colleagues as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time.
During the 1990s, Jericho performed for the American organizations Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) and World Championship Wrestling (WCW), as well as for international promotions in countries such as Canada, Japan, and Mexico. In 2001, he became the first Undisputed WWF Champion, and thus the final holder of the WCW World Heavyweight Championship (then referred to as the World Championship), having won and unified the WWF and World titles by defeating Stone Cold Steve Austin and The Rock on the same night. Jericho headlined multiple pay-per-view (PPV) events during his time with the WWF/WWE, including WrestleMania X8 and the inaugural TLC and Elimination Chamber shows.
Among other accolades within the WWF/WWE, Jericho has won the Undisputed WWF Championship once, the WCW/World Championship twice, the World Heavyweight Championship three times, the WWE United States Championship two times, and the WWE Intercontinental Championship a record nine times. Jericho is the ninth Triple Crown Champion, as well as the fourth Grand Slam Champion in history. In addition, he was the 2008 Superstar of the Year Slammy Award winner and (along with Big Show as Jeri-Show) won the 2009 Tag Team of the Year Slammy Award—making him the only winner of both Superstar and Tag Team of the Year. He was inducted into the Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame in 2010.
After his departure from WWE in 2018, Jericho signed with NJPW, where he became a one-time IWGP Intercontinental Champion, becoming the first man to have held both the WWE and IWGP Intercontinental Championships. Jericho joined AEW in January 2019 and became the inaugural holder of the AEW World Championship in August of that year.
In 1999, Jericho became lead vocalist of heavy metal band Fozzy, who released their eponymous debut album the following year. The group's early work is composed largely of cover versions, although they have focused primarily on original material from third album All That Remains (2005) onward. Jericho has also appeared on numerous television shows over the years, including the 2011 season of Dancing With the Stars. He hosted the ABC game show Downfall, the 2011 edition of the Revolver Golden Gods Awards, and the UK's Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards in 2012 and 2017.