Maximilien François Marie Isidore de Robespierre (French: [mak.si.mi.ljɛ̃ fʁɑ̃.swa ma.ʁi i.zi.dɔʁ də ʁɔ.bɛs.pjɛʁ]; 6 May 1758 – 28 July 1794) was a French lawyer and statesman who was one of the best-known and most influential figures of the French Revolution. As a member of  the Constituent Assembly and the Jacobin Club, he campaigned for universal manhood suffrage and the abolition both of celibacy for the clergy and slavery. In 1791, Robespierre became an outspoken advocate for the citizens without a voice, for their unrestricted admission to the National Guard, to public offices,  and for the right to carry arms in self-defence. He played an important part in the agitation which brought about the fall of the French monarchy on 10 August 1792 and the summoning of a National Convention. His goal was to create a united and indivisible France, equality before the law and to abolish prerogatives. 
As one of the leading members of the insurrectionary Paris Commune, Robespierre was elected as a deputy to the French Convention in early September 1792 but was soon criticised for trying to establish either a triumvirate or a dictatorship. In November Condorcet considered the French Revolution as a religion and Robespierre had all the characteristics of a leader of a sect, or a cult. In April 1793, he urged the creation of a sans-culotte army to enforce revolutionary laws and sweep away any counter-revolutionary conspirator, leading to the armed Insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793. In July he was appointed as a member of the powerful Committee of Public Safety, reorganized the Revolutionary Tribunal, and proposed to close the Convention. In October the committee declared itself as revolutionary government. Those who were not actively defending France became his enemy.Robespierre is best known for his role during the Reign of Terror, during which he oversaw the arrest and execution of numerous political adversaries  whom he and his allies deemed to oppose the Revolution. He exerted his influence to suppress the Girondins to the right, the Hébertists to the left and the Dantonists in the centre. It is estimated that after the introduction of the Law of Suspects almost 17,000 people were sentenced to death and guillotined during the Terror. The extent to which defendants  received appropriate levels of due process before being executed remains controversial.
Robespierre was eventually undone by his obsession with the vision of an ideal republic and his indifference to the human costs of installing it, which turned both members of the Convention and the French public against him. The Terror ended when he and many of his allies were arrested on 9 Thermidor and then executed the day after, events that initiated a period known as the Thermidorian Reaction.The extent to which Robespierre was personally responsible for the excesses of the Great Terror remains the subject of intense debate among historians of the French Revolution. To some, Robespierre was the Revolution's principal ideologist and embodied the country's first democratic experience, marked by the often revised and never implemented French Constitution of 1793. To others, he was the incarnation of the Terror that followed during Year II of the French Revolutionary calendar.

