Michael Gregory Mizanin (born October 8, 1980) is an American professional wrestler, actor and media personality. He is currently signed to WWE, where he performs on the SmackDown brand under the ring name The Miz.
Mizanin first gained fame as a reality television participant. He was a cast member on MTV's The Real World: Back to New York in 2001 and subsequently appeared in its spinoff series, Real World/Road Rules Challenge from 2002 to 2005, where he reached the finals in The Gauntlet and The Inferno while winning Battle of the Seasons and The Inferno II. Furthermore, he reached the final in Battle of the Network Reality Stars and won a 3-part Reality Stars-themed episode of Fear Factor in 2006. After becoming the runner-up in the fourth season of Tough Enough and subsequently launching his WWE career, Mizanin appeared on Diva Search, Total Divas and Tough Enough. He and his wife Maryse also starred in their own reality show titled Miz & Mrs. that premiered in 2018. He has also come to star in several films produced by WWE Studios, portraying Jake Carter in The Marine 3: Homefront, The Marine 4: Moving Target and The Marine 5: Battleground as well as starring in Christmas Bounty and Santa's Little Helper.
After being trained at Deep South Wrestling and Ohio Valley Wrestling, he was promoted to the main roster in 2006. Within WWE, The Miz has won eighteen total championships: the WWE Championship once, the Intercontinental Championship eight times, the United States Championship twice, and eight tag team championships (two World Tag Team, four WWE (now Raw) Tag Team, and two SmackDown Tag Team), making him the 25th Triple Crown Champion and 14th Grand Slam Champion in company history. The Miz also won the 2010 Raw Money in the Bank ladder match, and was ranked number one on Pro Wrestling Illustrated (PWI)'s annual PWI 500 list for 2011. He is one of the 10 most prolific pay-per-view performers in WWE history. The Miz has headlined several pay-per-view events for WWE, including WrestleMania XXVII.

