Jessica Hilda Mauboy (born 4 August 1989) is an Australian R&B and pop singer, songwriter, and actress. Born and raised in Darwin, Northern Territory, Mauboy rose to fame in 2006 on the fourth season of Australian Idol; she became the runner-up and subsequently signed a recording contract with Sony Music Australia. After releasing a live album of her Idol performances and briefly being a member of the girl group Young Divas in 2007, Mauboy released her debut studio album, Been Waiting, the following year. It earned Mauboy her first number-one single "Burn", became the second highest-selling Australian album of 2009, and was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA).
Mauboy's second studio album, Get 'Em Girls (2010), showcased a more hard-edged R&B sound than her previous release, and produced four platinum singles. Her third studio album, Beautiful (2013), which explored a mixture of dance-oriented tracks with R&B and pop, included the top-ten hits "Pop a Bottle (Fill Me Up)", "Never Be the Same" and "Can I Get a Moment?". Aside from her music career, Mauboy has also ventured into acting, with starring roles in films Bran Nue Dae (2010) and The Sapphires (2012), which earned her the AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role. She returned to acting in 2016, playing the lead role in the television drama series The Secret Daughter for two seasons. It was Mauboy's first major TV role and was written especially for her. Mauboy released two accompanying soundtrack albums for The Secret Daughter, the first of which made her the first Indigenous artist to achieve a number-one album on the ARIA Albums Chart. Her fourth studio album, Hilda (October 2019), debuted at number one.
Mauboy is one of Australia's most successful female artists. She has achieved six top-ten albums (including two number-ones) and 16 top-twenty singles (including 9 top-ten hits). She has won two ARIA Music Awards from 25 nominations, and was ranked sixteenth on the Herald Sun's list of the "100 Greatest Australian Singers of All Time". Mauboy has collaborated with several international artists such as Flo Rida, Snoop Dogg, Ludacris, Jay Sean, and Pitbull. She has also toured with Beyoncé and Chris Brown, and performed at many notable events, including the Australian visits for Oprah Winfrey, Ellen DeGeneres, and US President Barack Obama. Mauboy was a guest performer at the second semi-final of the Eurovision Song Contest in 2014. She competed for Australia at the 2018 Eurovision Song Contest and reached 20th place.
Jessica's 2019 album “Hilda” debuted at #1 on the ARIA Charts.