Nati Ninet Tayeb (Hebrew: נינט טייב‎; born October 21, 1983), commonly known only as Ninet, is an Israeli musician, singer-songwriter, composer, DJ, model and actress.
She is considered among the most famous people in the Israeli entertainment industry, and was labeled "one of the hottest new artists to break into the United States."Ninet has released four successful albums in Israel (one of them in English), and has twice won Israel's Favorite Act at the MTV Europe Music Awards. She has also worked with producer Mike Crossey (who produced her third album, Sympathetic Nervous System), and artists such as Steven Wilson, Gary Lucas, Cyndi Lauper, The Jesus and Mary Chain, and The Dead Daisies.
Alongside her musical career, Ninet has enjoyed a successful acting career, performing in movies, scripted series and the theatre.
After achieving almost every accolade available to her in her homeland, Ninet set her sights on the international stage, looking to showcase her music to larger audiences worldwide.Ninet finished her first high-profile international tour in the U.S, Canada (Toronto & Montreal), and Europe, in 2016. The tour featured songs from her recent release. It was her 5th album and the first to be released and promoted in the U.S. As part of her tour, Ninet was selected to perform at SXSW in March 2016. She was also as a featured guest vocalist on Steven Wilson's tour, who after their successful collaborations in the past, invited her to join him for several performances.The 2016 tour was the result of Ninet's short visit to the U.S in 2015, which created an extensive buzz and high demand for this "infectious female artist".During her time in the U.S, Ninet performed several concerts in New York City, which were praised by the critics. One of the critics stated that "having seen Ninet perform … it’s safe to say that the entire audience was fixated and almost hypnotized by her presence." Others claimed that "her bold renditions of songs like 'Crazy' and her original releases have showcased the range in which she approaches music and thus identifies with at least some part of all of us."In preparation for her 2016 tour, Ninet released two new singles from her forthcoming album – "Paper Parachute" and "Child". The two "promise an album worth waiting for", and were described as ones in which Ninet's "haunting vocals are backed by clever production work and energy fulfilling beats". 
Paper Parachute, Tayeb's fifth album, came out on 3 February 2017. During the middle and the end of 2016 Tayeb released singles Superstar and Subservient. In 2018 Ninet had a role in the Israeli TV series, When Heroes Fly.

