Rob Szatkowski (born December 18, 1970), better known by his ring name Rob Van Dam(frequently abbreviated to RVD), is an American professional wrestler and actor currently signed to Impact Wrestling. He has won 21 total championships, and is the only wrestler in history to have held the WWE Championship, the ECW World Heavyweight Championship, and the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. He headlined many pay-per-view events throughout three decades between the 1990s and 2010s, including the 1998 edition of November to Remember (ECW flagship event) and 2011 edition of TripleMania (AAA flagship event). In 2002, Van Dam was ranked the number one pro wrestler in the world by Pro Wrestling Illustrated. He was voted "Most Popular Wrestler" by readers of the magazine in 2001 and again in 2002. WWE named him the greatest star in ECW history in 2014.Van Dam gained mainstream popularity in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW), where he became one of the most famous wrestlers of the promotion. During his time in ECW, he was managed by Bill Alfonso and have feuds with Jerry Lynn and Sabu, forming a tag team with the latter. The would won the ECW Tag Team Championship twice with Sabu. On April 4, 1998, Van Dam defeated Bam Bam Bigelow to win the ECW Television Championship, a title he held for 700 days until he vacated the championship due to an injury on March 4, 2000. While Van Dam worked as a heel, he became very popular with fans, winning the Pro Wrestling Illustrated's Most Popular Wrestler award in 1998, being the only heel wrestler to win the award.
When the ECW closed, Van Dam signed a contract with World Wrestling Federation and was involved in The Invasion storyline, where several WCW and ECW joined forces against WWF wrestlers. When the Invasion ended, Van Dam wrestled the following years as singles and tag team wrestler, winning the Hardcore, Intercontinental, Tag Team and World Tag Team Championships. At WrestleMania 22, Rob Van Dam won the Money in the Bank Ladder match. After this victory, he received a big push and challenged the WWE Champion John Cena to a title match at One Night Stand, an ECW-themed PPV. At the event, Van Dam defeated Cena and won his first World Championship. Two days later, Paul Heyman awarded Van Dam with the reactivated ECW World Heavyweight Championship.
After leaving WWE in 2006, Van Dam worked on the independent circuit until he signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) in 2010. A few months after his debut, he defeated AJ Styles to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. He would remain under contract with TNA until 2013.  
Van Dam has performed as an actor in a number of TV shows, including an episode of The X-Files. He also performed in the 2010 movie Wrong Side of Town.

