The Gdańsk University of Technology (GUT; Polish: Politechnika Gdańska) is a technical university in the Wrzeszcz borough of Gdańsk , and one of the oldest universities in Poland. It has nine faculties and with 41 fields of study and more than 18 thousand undergraduate, as well as about 626 doctoral students. It employs 2768 people, including 1313 academic teachers.Some degree courses and various specialisations are taught in English. Moreover, some of the courses offered by GUT are unique in Poland, for instance ones in Construction Chemistry, Nanotechnology, Geodesy and Cartography, as well as Engineering of Natural Resources. 
Students have access to specialist laboratories, lecture theatres with multimedia facilities, a library with 1.2 million volumes and various sports facilities. Undergraduates can also join one or more of 60 student science or language societies as well as other organisations. 
GUT is the first and only Polish university to be a member of the CDIO Initiative, founded by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in collaboration with Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. CDIO aims to provide an education for engineers that enables them to “Conceive, Design, Implement and Operate” pro-industrial technological systems.
Active member of a number of university networks and associations, e.g. Baltic Science Research (coordination of nanotechnology research and education), Baltic University Network (Uppsala Protocol) and the Baltic Sea Region University Network.
In October 2015, the school became a member of CESAER. In 2016, it was listed as one of the 800 best universities in the world by Times Higher Education World University Rankings.With over nine people applying for one place at our university, GUT was ranked at the first position in this year's list of the most popular Polish universities. The ranking was published by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education. GUT also ranked 4th among technical universities and 9th among all universities in Poland in the prestigious higher education ranking prepared by the „Perspektywy” Educational Foundation.Gdańsk University of Technology has an international institutional accreditation EUA – IEP (European University Association – Institutional Evaluation Programme).