Andi (Andrei) Gutmans is a  programmer and entrepreneur, born in Switzerland and currently residing in the United States. He helped to co-create PHP, and co-founded Zend Technologies and is a General Manager  at Amazon Web Services. A graduate of the Technion, the Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa, Gutmans and fellow student Zeev Suraski created PHP 3 in 1997. In 1999 they wrote the Zend Engine, the core of PHP 4, and founded Zend Technologies, which has since overseen PHP advances, including the PHP 5  and most recent PHP 7 releases. The name Zend is a portmanteau of their forenames, Zeev and Andi.Gutmans served as CEO of Zend Technologies until October 2015 when Zend was acquired by Rogue Wave Software. Before being appointed CEO in February 2009, he led Zend's R&D including development of all Zend products and Zend's contributions to the open-source Zend Framework and PHP Development Tools projects. He has participated at Zend in its corporate financing and has also led alliances with vendors like Adobe, IBM, Microsoft, and Oracle.Gutmans served on the board of the  Eclipse Foundation  (October 2005 - October 2008), is an emeritus member of the Apache Software Foundation, and was nominated for the FSF Award for the Advancement of Free Software in 1999.
In 2004 he wrote a book called "PHP 5 Power Programming"  together with Stig Bakken and Derick Rethans.
Gutmans was recognized by ComputerWorld magazine in July 2007   in their article “40 Under 40: 40 Innovative IT People to Watch, Under the Age of 40.” In March 2016, Gutmans left Rogue Wave to join Amazon Web Services. Explaining his motivations, Gutmans cited "Cloud infrastructure adoption is at a tipping point" and "the data 'center of gravity' is moving to the cloud", where Amazon "appears to effectively balance innovation and invention: a focus on customer value with a bias to action". In his role at Amazon Web Services, Gutmans manages Amazon Elasticsearch Service, Amazon Redshift, Amazon CloudSearch, Amazon ElastiCache and Amazon Neptune.
Gutmans holds four citizenships: Swiss, British, Israeli and American.