Jani Allan (born 11 September 1952) is a South African journalist, columnist, writer and broadcaster. She is one of the country's  first media celebrities, garnering significant attention in the 1980s and 1990s.In 1980 Allan became a columnist for the centrist newspaper, the Sunday Times,  the country's biggest-circulating weekly newspaper. She was the newspaper's best-read columnist over the next decade, publishing columns such as Just Jani, Jani Allan's Week and Face to Face. At the height of her fame, the newspaper commissioned a Gallup poll in 1987 to find "the most admired person in South Africa" and she came first. In 2015, Marianne Thamm of the Daily Maverick described Allan as having been "the most influential writer and columnist in the country".
She later became the subject of press interest over the nature of her relationship with an interview subject, Eugène Terre'Blanche. Allan strongly denied the affair allegations and took an injunction out against Terre'Blanche. Allan was forced to leave South Africa when her apartment was bombed by the far-right in 1989. After a brief stint working at her newspaper's London bureau, she parted company with the newspaper. She then pursued freelance writing opportunities and published a regular column for Scope. Allan filed an unsuccessful and highly publicized libel suit in London against the broadcaster Channel 4 in 1992 over the affair allegations.
She returned to South Africa in 1996, publishing a sponsored web column and presenting a radio show on Cape Talk.  After an extended break she returned to the South African media frame in 2013. In 2014, she made headlines around the world after publishing an open letter to accused murderer Oscar Pistorius. Jacana Media published Allan's memoirs, Jani Confidential on 16 March 2015. Allan continues to write freelance opinion pieces for South African publications and since 2018 writes semi-regularly for the New York newspaper, The Epoch Times. Allan has lived in the United States since 2001.

