Howard D. Schultz (born July 19, 1953) is an American businessman, author, and philanthropist. He served as the chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of the Starbucks Coffee Corporation for more than two decades; first from 1986 to 2000, and then from 2008 to 2017. After stepping down as CEO, Schultz stayed at the company from 2017 to 2018 as its executive chairman overseeing Starbucks's philanthropic and charitable giving arm. Leading the firm for nearly four decades, he is the longest-serving head of the coffeehouse. Schultz owned the Seattle SuperSonics from 2001 to 2006, a basketball franchise that he sold for US$350 million to Clay Bennett, who moved the NBA team to Oklahoma creating the Oklahoma City Thunder. 
Born and raised in the Brooklyn borough of New York, Schultz graduated from Northern Michigan University in 1975. After briefly selling office equipment door-to-door one of his early clients, the then coffeehouse startup Starbucks, onboarded him as their marketing and operations head in 1982. A business trip to Milan, Italy and the country's coffee culture inspired him to open Il Giornale, a specialty coffeeshop that  merged with Starbucks during the late-1980s. Schultz pushed the new company to sell more than coffee beans and equipment, quickly establishing a large network of stores that served espresso, coffee, teas, and casual food. Following large-scale distribution deals – particularly with major hotels, groceries, and bookstores – Starbucks became the largest coffee-house chain in the world. Schultz took the company public in 1992 and used a $271 million valuation to double their store count in a series of  highly publicized coffee wars. He stepped down in 2000 to focus on Starbucks' international expansion, succeeded by Orin Smith.
During the 2008 financial crisis, Schultz returned as chief executive to stabilize the company after years of unsustainable growth. Succeeding Jim Donald, Schultz led a mass-firing of executives, shuttered hundreds of weak stores, and temporarily closed all U.S. stores to retrain employees in making espresso. He orchestrated multiple acquisitions of American and Chinese beverage companies, introduced a national loyalty program, and enforced fair trade standards. His aggressive expansion in Chinese markets has been credited with reconciling the country's tea-culture with coffee consumption in China. Schultz's positioning of Starbucks as a social hub ("third place") is widely seen as introducing the second wave of coffee culture in the U.S., particularly in Seattle. His second tenure sustained both significant and sustained criticism as well as growth, ultimately adding nearly $100 billion in market capitalization to the company, a 21,000% increase in shareholder value. Schultz was succeeded by Kevin Johnson as CEO in April 2017, and has, since 2018, retained the title "Chairman emeritus" of Starbucks. 
A noted author of business literature, he has written four books: Pour Your Heart Into It (1997), Onward (2011), For Love of Country (2014) and From the Ground Up (2019). Long known for his outspoken politically centrist views, Schultz considered a candidacy in the 2012, 2016, and 2020 U.S. presidential elections as an independent candidate. He declined to join all three contests because of the two-party system and fears of splitting the vote. Schultz supports bipartisanship across the political spectrum and is widely considered to be a centrist Democrat ideologically. His positions on domestic politics are socially liberal and fiscally moderate. In foreign policy, he is seen as a "liberal hawk", favoring American-led international affairs and institutionalism. Schultz was named the 680th-richest person in the U.S. by Forbes with a net worth of $4.0 billion (April 2020). To further his private philanthropic efforts, he established the Schultz Family Foundation which focuses on helping military veterans and fighting youth unemployment.

