Lega Nord (LN; English: Northern League), whose complete name is Lega Nord per l'Indipendenza della Padania (Northern League for the Independence of Padania), is a political party in Italy. In the run-up of the 2018 general election, the party was rebranded as Lega (League) without changing its official name in the party's statute. The party was nonetheless frequently referred to only as "Lega" even before the rebranding, as well as Carroccio.
The LN was established in 1991 as a federation of six regional parties of northern and north-central Italy, including Liga Veneta, Lega Lombarda, Piemont Autonomista, Uniun Ligure, Lega Emiliano-Romagnola and Alleanza Toscana, which became the founding national sections. The party's founder was Umberto Bossi, federal secretary from 1991 to 2012. After an internal crisis and struggle, the LN was briefly led by Roberto Maroni, who was elected President of Lombardy in 2013. Consequently, Matteo Salvini defeated Bossi in a leadership election and became secretary.
Currently, Giancarlo Giorgetti and Lorenzo Fontana serve as deputy secretaries, while Roberto Calderoli coordinates the national sections. Leading members include Attilio Fontana (President of Lombardy), Luca Zaia (President of Veneto), Massimiliano Fedriga (President of Friuli-Venezia Giulia), Maurizio Fugatti (President of Trentino) and Donatella Tesei (President of Umbria). Former leading members include Gianfranco Miglio (the political scientist who developed the "Padania" concept), Franco Rocchetta (founder of Liga Veneta), Irene Pivetti (former president of the Chamber of Deputies), Gipo Farassino (founder of Piemont Autonomista) and Roberto Cota (former President of Piedmont).
The LN advocates the transformation of Italy into a federal state, fiscal federalism, regionalism and greater regional autonomy, especially for northern regions. At times, the party has advocated the secession of the North, referred to as "Padania", and consequently Padanian nationalism. The party has always opposed illegal immigration, especially when involving non-Europeans and Muslims. Under the leadership of Salvini, the party has redirected its focus on the latter issue. At the same time, the party began emphasizing Euroscepticism and other populist themes. Consequently, the party is a member of the Identity and Democracy Party at the European level. Additionally, Salvini established a sister party in southern Italy named Us with Salvini and for the 2018 general election restyled the party's symbol and name, dropping the word "Nord" and introducing "Salvini Premier". All these changes have been harshly criticised by Bossi and the Padanist old guard, which now operates from a minority position. However, under Salvini, the League has reached its highest popularity, both in the North and the rest of Italy. Furthermore, in northern regions the party still has a strong autonomist outlook, especially in Veneto where Venetian nationalism is stronger than ever before. Finally, the League maintains its power base in the North, where it gets most of its support.
In the 2018 general election, the League was the third-largest party behind the Five Star Movement (M5S) and the Democratic Party (PD), while in the 2019 European Parliament election became the largest. In the most recent regional elections, the LN was the largest party in Veneto, Lombardy, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino, Piedmont, Abruzzo and Umbria, the second-largest in Aosta Valley, Emilia-Romagna, Tuscany, Sardinia (where its ally, the Sardinian Action Party, came third) and Basilicata, as well as the third-largest in Liguria, Marche and South Tyrol.