The Progress Party (Bokmål: Fremskrittspartiet, Nynorsk: Framstegspartiet, commonly abbreviated as FrP) is a libertarian right-wing political party in Norway. The party values are focused on civil liberties, individualism, and limited government. It is the country's third largest political party, with 26 representatives in the Norwegian Storting. The party was a partner in Norway's centre-right government coalition from 2013 until they withdrew from the government in January 2020. Its leader, Siv Jensen, served as Norway's Minister of Finance in the government.Its policies support market liberalism,  law and order, and downsizing the bureaucracy and the public sector. The Progress Party self-identifies as an economic liberal party which competes with the socialist left to represent the workers of Norway. The party advocates increased spending of Norway's Oil Fund on investments in infrastructure and aims to eliminate the existing budgetary rules which set a limit on such spending.  The party has officially opposed Norwegian membership in the European Union since 2016, after having been neutral on the issue before. It is sometimes controversially described as populist.The party seeks a more restrictive immigration policy and improved integration. It is sometimes described as "anti-immigration", although the party supports migration of labor from the EU through EEC as well as fulfillment of Norway's obligations to receive refugees through Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. The program of the party considers humanitarian action abroad to be preferable, when possible, to receiving refugees from affected areas.The party was founded by Anders Lange in 1973 as an anti-tax protest movement. Its development was greatly influenced by Carl I. Hagen, the party's long-standing leader between 1978 and 2006.  Despite the electoral success, the party was initially isolated in the Norwegian Parliament. This situation gradually changed, and after the 2013 parliamentary election, the party concluded a government coalition agreement with the Conservative Party. It held seven out of the nineteen ministerial posts in the Norwegian government until withdrawing in January 2020.