Tufts University is a private research university in Medford and Somerville, Massachusetts. Tufts College was founded in 1852 by Christian universalists who worked for years to open a nonsectarian institution of higher learning. It was a small New England liberal arts college until its transformation into a larger research university in the 1970s. Tufts emphasizes active citizenship and public service in all its disciplines, and is known for its internationalism and study abroad programs.Tufts offers over 90 undergraduate and 160 graduate programs across ten schools in the greater Boston area and Talloires, France. It has the country's oldest graduate school of international relations, the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. The largest school is the School of Arts and Sciences, which includes both the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts University, which is affiliated with the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. The School of Engineering offers an entrepreneurial focus through its Gordon Institute and maintains close connections with the original college.The university has a campus in Downtown Boston that houses the medical, dental, and nutrition schools, as well as the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, affiliated with several medical centers in the area. Tufts offers joint undergraduate degree programs with the New England Conservatory, and the Sciences Po Paris with additional programs with the University of Paris, University of Oxford and constituents of the University of London. Several of its programs have affiliations with the nearby institutions of Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Tufts is consistently ranked among the 30 best secondary schools in the country, and is highly selective, admitting only 15% of applicants as of fall 2018. Alumni and affiliates include Nobel laureates, heads of state, governors, senators, representatives, Emmy and Academy Award winners, and National Academy members. Tufts has also graduated several Rhodes, Marshall, Fulbright, Truman, and Goldwater scholars.