New York University (NYU) is a private research university based in New York City. Founded in 1831 by Albert Gallatin as an institution to "admit based upon merit rather than birthright or social class", NYU's historical campus is in Greenwich Village. NYU is tied for 29th among undergraduate colleges in the United States by U.S. News & World Report, and 27th in the world by Times Higher Education. NYU is highly selective, admitting only 15% of more than 85,000 applicants to the class of 2024.NYU is the largest independent research university in the United States, but also has degree-granting campuses in Abu Dhabi and Shanghai, and academic centers in Accra, Berlin, Buenos Aires, Florence, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Paris, Prague, Sydney, Tel Aviv, and Washington, D.C. NYU is organized into 25 schools, including 10 undergraduate school and numerous graduate schools. The university has numerous research efforts, including research partnerships with the Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence and with major technology firms like Twitter and IBM. The university has also since launched various internal research centers in the fields of artificial intelligence, history, culture, medicine, mathematics, philosophy, and economics. NYU is one of the top feeder schools for careers in finance and investment banking on Wall Street, accounting for 3.9% of hires in major financial institutions.NYU is labeled as one of the "New Ivies", and was ranked as America's "#1 dream school" by the Princeton Review from 2004 to 2007. The university's medical school, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, became tuition-free to all students in 2018, regardless of need or merit, becoming the only national top 10 medical school (NYU is ranked #4 for research in the nation) in the nation to offer it. The university's other graduate schools are also highly ranked, including NYU School of Law as the 6th best law school in the nation, the Stern School of Business as the 10th best business school in the nation, the Tisch School of Arts as the 2nd best film school in the nation, and the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences as the 9th best mathematics school (1st for applied mathematics) in the nation. NYU's College of Arts and Science also holds the 11th best economics department in the nation, 12th best political science department in the nation, and the #1 ranked philosophy department in the world.Alumni include heads of state, royalty, a US Supreme Court justice, 5 State Governors, 17 billionaires, founders and CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, astronauts, actors/actresses, singers, songwriters, filmmakers, and Time 100 notables. The university also has the 5th highest number of alumni worth $30 million or more. As of October 2019, 37 Nobel Laureates, 8 Turing Award winners, 5 Fields Medalists, over 30 Academy Award winners, over 30 Pulitzer Prize winners, 7 Lasker Award winners, multiple Abel Prize and Crafoord Prizes winners and MacArthur fellows, and hundreds of Guggenheim Fellows and members of the National Academies of Sciences, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, United States Congress, and U.S. diplomats have been affiliated as faculty or alumni. The university is also affiliated with multiple Rhode Scholars, Marshal Scholars, Schwarzman Scholars, and a Mitchell Scholar, with NYU Abu Dhabi producing more Rhodes Scholars per student than any university with over 14 Rhodes Scholars in 7 years.

