The Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (Norwegian: Norsk Kvinnesaksforening; NKF) is a Norwegian nonpartisan political advocacy organisation and Norway's oldest and preeminent women's and girls' rights organisation.
It was founded in 1884 on the initiative of Gina Krog and Hagbart Berner by 171 prominent women and men, including five Norwegian Prime Ministers. Its basic principle is that full and equal enjoyment of human rights is due to all women and girls, and it works to advance women's social, economic and political situation in Norway as well as internationally. Historically associated with the Liberal Party, NKF is today broadly representative of the political spectrum. The association has always been Norway's most important mainstream feminist or liberal feminist organisation and has successfully campaigned for women’s right to education, the right to vote, the right to work, the adoption of the 1978 Gender Equality Act and the establishment of what is now the Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud. In line with its roots in 19th century first-wave liberal feminism, political and legal reform remains its primary focus, and it has always concentrated on lobbying government bodies in a professional way; since the 1970s the implementation of the CEDAW convention has been a major issue. In 1896 the association also founded the Norwegian Women's Public Health Association, a humanitarian organisation whose membership reached 250,000.
The current President is Karin M. Bruzelius, a former Supreme Court Justice on the Supreme Court of Norway. NKF is a member of the International Alliance of Women (IAW), which has general consultative status to the United Nations Economic and Social Council and participatory status with the Council of Europe. NKF is also a member of the Norwegian Women's Lobby and of the Forum for Women and Development, and initiated the establishment of both organisations. Several of NKF's early leaders, among them the noted humanitarian Fredrikke Marie Qvam, were married to Norwegian prime ministers. Its postwar leaders include Liberal Party leader and cabinet minister Eva Kolstad and the former chairman of UNICEF, Torild Skard. Its honorary members include Camilla Collett and Norway's first female Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland. NKF's offices are located at Majorstuen in Oslo. NKF has always been open to both women and men.