Skyfall is a 2012 spy film and the twenty-third in the James Bond series produced by Eon Productions. The film is the third to star Daniel Craig as fictional MI6 agent James Bond and features Javier Bardem as Raoul Silva, the villain, and Judi Dench in her final appearance as M. It was directed by Sam Mendes and written by Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, and John Logan, and features the theme song "Skyfall", written and performed by Adele. It was distributed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) and Columbia Pictures.The story centres on Bond investigating an attack on MI6; part of a plot by former agent Raoul Silva to discredit and kill M as revenge for abandoning him. It sees the return of two recurring characters after an absence of two films: Q, played by Ben Whishaw, and Miss Moneypenny, played by Naomie Harris.
Mendes was approached to direct after the release of Quantum of Solace in 2008. Development was suspended when MGM ran into financial trouble, and did not resume until December 2010; meanwhile the original screenwriter, Peter Morgan, left the project. When production resumed, Logan, Purvis, and Wade continued writing what became the final version. Filming began in November 2011, primarily in the United Kingdom, with smaller portions shot in China and Turkey.
Skyfall premiered at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 23 October 2012 and was then released in the UK on 26 October and the US on 9 November. It was the first James Bond film to be screened in IMAX venues, although it was not filmed with IMAX cameras. The release coincided with the 50th anniversary of the series, which began with Dr. No in 1962. Skyfall was very well-received by critics, who praised its screenplay, acting (particularly by Craig, Bardem, and Dench), Mendes's direction, cinematography, musical score, and action sequences. It was the fourteenth film to gross over $1 billion worldwide, and the only James Bond film to do so. It became the seventh-highest-grossing film of all time, the highest-grossing film in the UK, the highest-grossing film in the series, the highest-grossing film worldwide for both Sony Pictures and MGM, and the second highest-grossing film of 2012. The film won several accolades, including two Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards and two Grammy Awards.
The next film in the series, Spectre, was released in November 2015, with Craig reprising his role and Mendes returning to direct.