The Left (German: Die Linke, stylised as DIE LiNKE.), also commonly referred to as the Left Party (German: die Linkspartei, pronounced [diː ˈlɪŋkspaʁˌtaɪ̯] (listen)), is a democratic socialist political party in Germany. The party was founded in 2007 as the result of the merger of the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) and Labour and Social Justice – The Electoral Alternative (WASG). Through PDS, the party is the direct descendant of the Marxist-Leninist ruling party of the former East Germany (GDR), the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED).Since 2012, The Left's co-chairpersons have been Katja Kipping and Bernd Riexinger. The party currently holds 69 seats out of 709 in the Bundestag, the federal legislature of Germany, having won 9.2% of votes cast in the 2017 federal election. Its parliamentary group is the fifth largest of six in the Bundestag, and is headed by parliamentary co-leaders Amira Mohamed Ali and Dietmar Bartsch.
The party is represented in ten of Germany's sixteen state legislatures, including all five of the eastern states. The party currently participates in governments in the states of both Berlin and Bremen, where it is a junior partner in a three-party coalition with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and Greens, as well as in Thuringia, where it leads a coalition with the SPD and Greens, headed by Minister-President Bodo Ramelow.
The Left is a founding member of the Party of the European Left, and is the third largest party in the European United Left–Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) group in the European Parliament. In September 2019, The Left had 61,055 registered members, making it the sixth largest party in Germany by membership.The party is the most left-wing party of the six represented in the Bundestag. It is described as far-left by some outlets, and is considered to be left-wing populist by some researchers, but the German Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (Verfassungsschutz) does not regard the party as extremist or a threat to democracy. However, it does monitor some of its internal factions, such as the Communist Platform and Socialist Left, on account of extremist tendencies, as do some states' constitutional authorities.