Per Yngve Ohlin (16 January 1969 – 8 April 1991), better known by his stage name Dead and nickname Pelle, was a Swedish black metal musician, best known as the lead vocalist and lyricist of the Norwegian black metal band Mayhem from 1988 until his suicide in 1991. He also performed as vocalist of the Swedish death metal band Morbid on their demo December Moon. Dead was a popular figure of the Norwegian black metal scene. Roadrunner Records ranked him No. 48 out of 50 of The Greatest Metal Front-Men of All Time.Dead was known for his morbid personality and obsession with death—his own and the concept in general, which gave rise to his stage name. He hoarded dead birds, wore shirts with funeral announcements printed on them, buried clothes that he only dug up just before performing in concert to smell like a rotting cadaver, and wore corpse paint, being the first in black metal to do so by some accounts. Unlike with other black metal performers, it is believed he did not do so for theatrical value but instead to present himself as a corpse on stage, which he accentuated by wounding himself with implements such as glass shards. He also liked having fans throw body parts of dead animals around at his shows.
Acquaintances described him as difficult to befriend or understand. Already intensely introverted and depressed, Dead's personality and demeanor would only become more withdrawn leading up to his death, a progression marked by such patterns as Dead harming himself offstage among friends and isolating himself in his room.
Dead committed suicide on 8 April 1991 by slitting his wrists and throat before shooting himself in the forehead with a shotgun. He left a brief suicide note, with the first sentence on the note being: "Excuse the blood". Controversially, an image from the aftermath was used as the cover of the bootleg live album Dawn of the Black Hearts. His death marked a turning point in the history of the Norwegian black metal scene which led to a wave of erratic behavior by the scene's members.