The Centre Party of Finland (Finnish: Suomen Keskusta, Kesk; Swedish: Centern i Finland) is a centrist, liberal-conservative, agrarian political party in Finland.
Founded in 1906 as the Agrarian League, the party represented rural communities and supported decentralisation of political power from Helsinki. In the 1920s, the party emerged as the main rival to the Social Democratic Party (SDP), and the party's first prime minister, Kyösti Kallio, held the office four times between 1922 and 1937.  After World War II, the party settled as one of the four major political parties in Finland, alongside the National Coalition Party, the Social Democrats, and, until the 1980s, the Communist SKDL. Urho Kekkonen served as President of Finland from 1956 to 1982: by far the longest period of any president. The name 'Centre Party' was adopted in 1965, and 'Centre of Finland' in 1988. The Centre Party was the largest party in Parliament from 2003 to 2011, during which time Matti Vanhanen was prime minister for seven years. Following the 2011 election, the party was reduced in parliamentary representation from the largest party to the fourth largest, but in 2015 it reclaimed its status as the largest party. In 2019, it suffered a considerable defeat, losing 18 of 49 seats.
As a Nordic agrarian party, the Centre Party's political influence is greatest in small and rural municipalities, where it often holds a majority of the seats in the municipal councils. Decentralisation is the policy that is most characteristic of the Centre Party. The Centre has been the ruling party in Finland a number of times since Finnish independence. 12 of the Prime Ministers of Finland, three of the Presidents and a former European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs have been from the party.  The Finnish Centre Party is the mother organisation of Finnish Centre Youth, Finnish Centre Students, and Finnish Centre Women.
It is now one of the five largest political parties in the country, along with the National Coalition Party, the SDP, the Green League and the Finns Party. It has 31 seats in the Finnish Parliament. The Centre Party chairman is Katri Kulmuni, who was elected in September 2019 to follow Juha Sipilä, the former Prime Minister of Finland.