Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi (ʿAbdrabbuh Manṣūr Hādī; Arabic: عبدربه منصور هادي‎  Yemeni pronunciation: [ˈʕæbdˈrɑb.bu mænˈsˤuːr ˈhæːdi]; born 1 September 1945) is a Yemeni politician and former Field Marshal of the Yemeni Armed Forces. He was Vice President from 1994 to 2012; and the President of Yemen from 27 February 2012 to 22 January 2015 when he was overthrown by Houthi revolutionaries. He has been retaining the title of 'president' after initially resigning, though he lives in exile in Saudi Arabia.Between 4 June and 23 September 2011, Hadi was the acting President of Yemen while Ali Abdullah Saleh was undergoing medical treatment in Saudi Arabia following an attack on the presidential palace during the 2011 Yemeni uprising. On 23 November, he became Acting President again, after Saleh moved into a non-active role pending the presidential election "in return for immunity from prosecution". Hadi was "expected to form a national unity government and also call for early presidential elections within 90 days" while Saleh continued to serve as President in name only. 
Mansour Hadi was chosen as a president for a two-year transitional period on February 21, 2012, in an election in which he was the only candidate. His mandate was extended for another year in January 2014. He remained in power after the expiration of his mandate.On 22 January 2015, he was forced to resign by the Houthis after a mass protest against his decision to raise the fuel subsidies and due to dissatisfaction with the outcome of the 2011 Revolution. Subsequently, the Houthis and the supporters of Saleh seized the presidential palace and placed Hadi under house arrest. A month later, he escaped to his hometown of Aden, rescinded his resignation, and denounced the Houthi takeover. The Houthis named a Revolutionary Committee to assume the powers of the presidency, as well as the General People's Congress, Hadi's own political party. On 25 March 2015, after the beginning of the Yemeni Civil War, Hadi fled Yemen in a boat as Houthi forces advanced on Aden. He arrived in Riyadh the next day, as Saudi Arabia began a bombing campaign in support of his government. He returned to Aden in September 2015, as Saudi-backed government forces recaptured the city. In late 2017, he was reportedly residing in Riyadh under house arrest. On 2 January 2020, the Specialised Criminal Court in Sanaa, Yemen, sentenced Hadi and his Prime Minister Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed to death, after the two were convicted of high treason, abuse of government estates and looting the country’s treasury.