Mark Rutte (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈmɑrk ˈrʏtə] (listen); born 14 February 1967) is a Dutch politician serving as Prime Minister of the Netherlands since 2010 and Leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) since 2006. 
After a career in business, Rutte was appointed State Secretary for Social Affairs and Employment in 2002 by Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende of the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), after a coalition agreement guaranteed the VVD several seats in the cabinet. Rutte was subsequently elected to the House of Representatives at the 2003 election. In 2004, he became State Secretary for Education, Culture and Science. After the 2006 Dutch municipal elections, which saw heavy losses for the VVD, the party's leader, Jozias van Aartsen, announced his resignation. Rutte stood the subsequent leadership election, and was elected on 31 May, resigning from the cabinet shortly afterwards. Rutte led his party into the 2006 election weeks later; although the VVD lost six seats, they became the largest party not in government.
At the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in them becoming the largest party in the House of Representatives for the first time in the party's history. After lengthy coalition negotiations, Rutte was sworn in as Prime Minister of the Netherlands leading the First Rutte cabinet. When Rutte was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal prime minister in 92 years, and the second-youngest in Dutch history.An impasse on talks on the budget led to his government's early collapse in April 2012, but the subsequent general election saw the VVD won its highest number of seats ever, leading to a coalition between the VVD and the Labour Party. The government became the first to see out its full term since 1998, and while at the 2017 general election the VVD lost seats, it remained the largest party. After a record-long formation period, Rutte agreed a new coalition between the VVD, CDA, D66 and CU parties, and was sworn in for a third term as Prime Minister on 26 October 2017.

