PJSC Aeroflot – Russian Airlines (Russian: ПАО "Аэрофло́т – Росси́йские авиали́нии", PAO Aeroflot—Rossiyskiye avialinii), commonly known as Aeroflot (English:   or  (listen)) (Russian: Аэрофлот, English translation: "air fleet", pronounced [ɐɛrɐˈfɫot]), is the flag carrier and largest airline of the Russian Federation. The airline was founded and operated since 1923, making Aeroflot to be one of the oldest active airlines in the world. Aeroflot is headquartered in the Central Administrative Okrug, Moscow, with its hub being Sheremetyevo International Airport. The airline flies to 146 destinations in 52 countries, excluding codeshared services.
From its inception to the early 1990s, Aeroflot was the flag carrier and a state-owned enterprise of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR/Soviet Union), a predecessor of Russia. During this time, Aeroflot grew its fleet to over five thousand domestically-made aircraft and expanded to operate a domestic and international flight network of over three thousand destinations throughout the Soviet Union and the globe, therefore making the airline the largest in the world at the time. In addition to passenger flights, Aeroflot also committed to doing freight operations and serving the state through transportation and military assistance. With the largest fleet comes a large burden, as Aeroflot was involved in numerous accidents and incidents during its operations compared to any other airline. Following the dissolution of the USSR, the carrier was restructured into an open joint-stock company and embarked on a radical transformation process, with Aeroflot shrinking the fleet dramatically while at the same time purchasing Western aircraft and newer domestic models and focusing on expanding its international market and later its domestic market.
By the end of 2017, Aeroflot controlled roughly 40% of the air market in Russia. Aeroflot owns Rossiya Airlines – an airline based in Saint Petersburg, Pobeda  – a low-cost carrier, and 51% of airline Aurora, based in the Russian Far East. Altogether, Aeroflot and its subsidiaries own 359 aircraft as of 31 December 2019, composed mainly of Airbus, Boeing, and domestic models such as the Sukhoi Superjet 100. Aeroflot also formerly had a cargo subsidiary named Aeroflot-Cargo, though the branch later merged with the parent airline.Aeroflot became a member of SkyTeam in April 2006, making it the first carrier in the former Soviet Union to do so. As of March 2020, the Russian Government owns 51% of Aeroflot through the Federal Agency for State Property Management, with the rest of the shares being free-floating.