The Kingdom of Hungary (Hungarian: Magyar Királyság), sometimes referred to as the Regency or the Horthy era, existed as a country from 1920 to 1946 under the rule of Regent Miklós Horthy. Horthy officially represented the Hungarian monarchy of Charles IV, Apostolic King of Hungary. Attempts by Charles IV to return to the throne were prevented by threats of war from neighbouring countries and by the lack of support from Horthy. Charles died in 1922, leaving the throne empty for the remainder of the country's time as a kingdom.
Hungary under Horthy was characterized by its conservative, nationalist and fiercely anti-communist character. The regency was based on an unstable alliance of conservatives and right-wingers. Foreign policy was characterized by revisionism - the total or partial revision of the Treaty of Trianon, which had seen Hungary lose over 70% of its territory along with over three million Hungarians, who mostly lived in the border territories outside the new borders of the kingdom. Hungary's interwar politics were dominated with an obsession of the territorial losses suffered in this treaty.
Germany's influence in Hungary has led some historians to consider that the country increasingly became a client state of Germany after 1938. The Kingdom of Hungary was an Axis Power during World War II and focused to regain Hungarian majority territory which had been lost in the Treaty of Trianon, achieving this goal in early 1941. By 1944, following heavy setbacks for the Axis, Horthy's government negotiated secretly with the Allies, and also considered leaving the war. Because of this Hungary was occupied by Germany and Horthy was deposed. The extremist Arrow Cross Party's leader Ferenc Szálasi established a new Nazi-backed government, effectively turning Hungary into a German-occupied puppet state.
After World War II, Hungary fell within the Soviet Union's sphere of influence. It changed name to the Hungarian State (Hungarian: Magyar Állam) and the Second Hungarian Republic was soon thereafter established in 1946. In 1949, the communist Hungarian People's Republic was founded.