Crayon Pop (Hangul: 크레용팝) is a South Korean girl group formed under Chrome Entertainment in 2012. The group consists of four members: Geummi, Ellin, Choa, and Way. Their fifth member, Soyul, left the group in 2017. Crayon Pop officially debuted in July 2012 with their performance of "Saturday Night" on Mnet's M! Countdown. Their first EP was not a commercial success, and when their song "Dancing Queen" was released in October, the group had few opportunities to promote on music shows. Instead they held guerrilla performances on the streets of Seoul, which helped increase their fanbase.
Crayon Pop gained a huge increase in popularity following the release of their single album "Bar Bar Bar" in June 2013. The group's unique stage outfits and choreography gained public attention, and made the title song a viral hit. It eventually managed to reach number 1 on Billboard's K-Pop Hot 100. Crayon Pop was able to earn numerous awards, including the New Rising Star Award at the Golden Disk Awards, the Hot Trend Award at the MelOn Music Awards, and Best New Female Artist at the Mnet Asian Music Awards.
The group has held solo concerts in South Korea, Japan and Taiwan, and has also performed in other countries including Australia and China. Throughout June and July 2014, the group was an opening act Lady Gaga's ArtRave: The Artpop Ball concert tour. Crayon Pop performed for it in 12 cities around the United States and Canada. Following their appearance in the Artpop tour, the group debuted their first subunit in October. The unit is named Strawberry Milk, and consists of the twin members Choa and Way. In March 2015, Crayon Pop released their second mini album FM, for which they used Super Sentai inspired costumes.
They released the song "RaRiRuRe" in June of that same year, which was their debut in the Japanese music market. The group continued their Japanese promotions with their second single "Dancing All Night" in November. Their first Japanese studio album Crayon Pop was released January 2016, and it ranked #11 on Oricon's Daily Album Charts. Crayon Pop collaborated with Mexican boy band CD9 in August, to release the song "Get Dumb". In September, Crayon Pop released the song "Vroom Vroom" ahead of their first album Crayon Pop Evolution Pop Vol. 1. They soon released the music video for "Doo Doom Chit", another song that would feature on the track list of the album.
On 19 April 2017, the group announced their contracts with Chrome Media had ended in March and they had gone their separate ways, although they would not be officially disbanding. On 30 May, it was revealed that Way, Choa, Geummi and Ellin would continue to promote as Crayon Pop under Chrome Entertainment, but Soyul had chosen to leave the group.

