Metal Mind Productions (MMP) is a Polish record label founded in 1987. The label focuses on rock and heavy metal. MMP is also publisher of Metal Hammer, the largest and the oldest heavy metal magazine. As a concert agency, it organises Metalmania, the largest heavy metal event in Central–Eastern Europe, and it organised over 1000 concerts including Monsters of Rock in Poland, 1991.
Metal Mind Productions over the years became the subject of criticism from such bands as Malevolent Creation, Enter Chaos, Behemoth and Moonlight among others, for releasing unauthorized records and lack of professionalism. In 2007 label purchased rights for several albums from Empire Records which was closed, that include titles from such bands as Totem, Sammath Naur, Dissenter, Deivos, Archeon, Spinal Cord, Demise, Naumachia, and Pyorrhoea. Metal Mind re-released albums by those bands in 2007 and 2008. Although musicians have not been informed about the deal and were unable to contact Metal Mind.From early 1990s Metal Mind had a licensing deal with Music for Nations until its closure in 2004. That included releases by such bands as Candlemass, Thrasher, Dispatched and Paradise Lost among others. Till 2005 label had distributing and licensing deal with Century Media Records That included releases by such bands as Sentenced, Death, Cryptopsy, Arch Enemy, Strapping Young Lad, Jag Panzer, The Gathering, Bloodbath and Massacre among others.In 2006 Metal Mind Productions has signed a multi-licensing deal with Roadrunner Records for the latter label's back catalogue. The selection of bands include Solitude Aeturnus, Willard, Trojan, Atrocity, Crimson Glory, Front Line Assembly, Violent Force, Acrophet, Amen, Atrophy, Heathen, Realm, Xentrix, Defiance, Disincarnate, Pestilence, Last Crack, Znowhite, Sadus, Toxik, Bulldozer and Gorguts. In 2008 label has signed similar deal with Nuclear Blast for the latter label's back catalogue. The selection of bands include Brutallity, Control Denied, Darkane, Disbelief, Dismal Euphony, Destruction, Theatre of Tragedy, Stormwitch, Darkseed, Disharmonic Orchestra, Gardenian, Primal Fear, Farmer Boys, Horde, Hypocrisy, Impulse Manslaughter, Macabre, Mortification, Night in Gales, Slaughter, Abomination, Warhammer and Winter.On other various licenses Metal Mind Productions released albums of such artists as Ankh, Anvil, Art Rock, Astharoth, Bang Tango, Bank, Blaze Bayley, Believer, Warlock and Wilczy Pająk among others.In 2010 label founder Tomasz Dziubiński died of neoplasm.