César Vidal Manzanares, born 1958 in Madrid, is a Spanish radio host, lawyer turned historian and author. He is doctor in history from UNED, where he was Professor-tutor during 8 years. His thesis received the Valedictorian Academic Award in 1991. He has a PhD in Law in University Alfonso X, El Sabio, in Theology and Philosophy by Logos University, where he is a member of the Board of Regents. He is also a member of the Executive Council of the Inter-American Institute for Democracy.  He is also member of the Academia Norteamericana de la Lengua Española ( North American Academy of the Spanish Language) since 2015. He has been collaborator of several media, as El Mundo, Diario 16, Periodico de Aragon and La Razon. He has hosted the radio show La Linterna on Cadena COPE from 2004 to 2009. That year he quit COPE to launch with Federico Jiménez Losantos a liberal radio, esRadio. In 2013 he abandoned that project too, due to disagreements with Jiménez Losantos.[5] Since 2014 he is the host of La Voz, a radio program broadcast from U.S.A, that has an international daily audience of over 600.000.He specializes in historical studies about totalitarian regimes and history of religions. His book " El Holocausto (1195) is the first complete history of the Holocaust written by a Spaniard. His book " Las Brigadas Internacionales" ( The International Brigades) has been qualified by the American historian, Stanlei G. Payne, as "the most complete book about the International Brigades published in any language, in any time, and in any place." Stanlei G. Payne also affirmed that "La Guerra Que Gano Franco" (The War that Franco Won) "is the best military history of the Spanish Civil War in one volume." In his books about the Spanish Civil War he has used the Soviet original sources to make discoveries about the role of the International Brigades in the Spanish Civil War and the Cold War, the Republican Political Repression or the foreign intervention in the conflict. In his work " Paracuellos- Katin: El Genocidio de la Izquierda" and in "Checas de Madrid," Vidal provides an estimate of people murdered during the Spanish Civil War by leftist groups. Among his studies in History of Religions, especially praised has been his thrilogy of founders of religions; " Jesus, el Judio","Buda, el Principe", and "Mahoma el Guia."
He has been the first translator of historical sources to Spanish such as "The Egyptian history of Manetho","The Gnostic Gospels of Nag Hammadi" , "The Complete Narrative of Ancient Egypt" and "Komintern Documents."
The number of his books is over 100 and several ones have been under the Best Seller list and received historical and literary awards.He is also known for his views on Radical Islam, Spanish Civil War and José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero's administration. In his books about the Civil War La Guerra que Ganó Franco, Checas de Madrid and  Paracuellos-Katyn. El Genocidio de la Izquierda, he gives revisionist views of the conflict that are at odds with mainstream historians, and which are shared by fellow conservatives like Pío Moa and Ricardo de la Cierva. In the latter book, Vidal provides an estimate of people murdered during the Spanish Civil War for practicing Catholicism. He has also claimed in his show that Islam and France have been Spain's main enemies throughout its history. He has the theory that May 68 was "a CIA operation to destabilize general De Gaulle", believes Basque is a "primitive language", and is skeptic about the theory of evolution.He has published more than 100 books. He also writes a column in newspaper La Razón, and used to publish a series called Misterios de la Historia in Libertad Digital.