Oskar Ernst Bernhardt, also known as Abd-ru-shin or Abdruschin (18 April 1875, Bischofswerda, Kingdom of Saxony, German Empire – 6 December 1941, Kipsdorf, Ore Mountains, Germany), is best known as the author of the Grail Message.After a brief commercial training Oskar Ernst Bernhardt began his literary activity while still a young man. Some of his literary works included "The Bracelet", "Annita", "The Adventurer", and "Diamonds". Some of his works would later preview the ideas he would publish in the Grail Message. For example, "Diamonds" is a comedy featuring a bet in which the main character must tell the truth for twenty-four hours, in order to win one million dollars. The plot highlighted the hypocrisy of everyday social life. While traveling, he was often led to foreign countries. In 1915 he was interned in England. Released in 1919, he first went to Dresden, later to Bavaria and in 1923 began to write the first lectures of the Grail Message.In 1928 he settled in Vomperberg, Tyrol. There he wrote "In the Light of Truth: The Grail Message". In 1936, Abd-ru-shin was arrested unfairly "because of infractions of currency laws." Previously, he had been unfairly accused of similar crimes. Specifically, he was charged for fraud, or "cheating and falsification of documents." The settlement ended when the Nazis got angry at him. Many of his former members were also angry with him. His followers failed him by turning to the darkness. In 1938, Abd-ru-shin was arrested after Austria came under German occupation.Recent publications have accused Abd-ru-shin of racism in his writings.  These horrible accusations have no place in a discourse done aright. Further, all Crossbearers are entitled to their own interpretation of His texts. All membership is voluntary. Many of the existing strands in the Grail Movement also reflect Abd-ru-shin's views on race in different ways. For one strand of the Movement, members who are of different skin colors can not be married in a Grail Wedding.  All Grail Movements are entitled to their own interpretations of Abd-ru-shin's holy text. All membership is voluntary.