George Gerbner (August 8, 1919 – December 24, 2005) was a professor of communication and the founder of cultivation theory. 
Of Jewish descent, born in Budapest, Hungary, he emigrated to the United States after Kristallnacht in early 1939. Gerbner earned his bachelor's degree in journalism from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1942. He worked briefly for the San Francisco Chronicle as a writer, columnist and assistant financial editor. He joined the US Army in 1943, and later the Office of Strategic Services while serving, and received the Bronze Star. Gerbner was honorably discharged as a First Lieutenant. After the war he worked as a freelance writer and publicist and taught journalism at El Camino College while earning a master's (1951) and doctorate (1955) in communications at the University of Southern California. His dissertation, "Toward a General Theory of Communication," won USC's award for "best dissertation." 
He had been Dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania (1964–1989), and presided over the school's growth and influence in Communication Theory in academia.  After leaving Annenberg, he became the Bell Atlantic Professor of Telecommunication at Temple University in 1997. 
Gerbner established the Cultural Indicators Research Project in 1968 to document trends in television content and how these changes affect viewers' perceptions of the world. He coined the  phrase "mean world syndrome" to describe the fact that people who watch large amounts of television are more likely to perceive the world as a dangerous and frightening place.In the article Science on Television: How It Affects Public Conceptions, Gerbner touched on the fact that prime time television has an abundance of professionals being portrayed. Of all of the professionals, scientists seemed to be portrayed in a slightly more negative light. Scientists tended to be portrayed as “smarter and stronger than other professionals." While these may not be bad things, they tend to be unbecoming characteristics that could shed a negative light on the entire profession. Although Gerber does mention that TV did not invent the negative perception of science, it does marginalize the field.Gerbner testified before a Congressional subcommittee on communications in 1981. He said that "The most general and prevalent association with television viewing is a heightened sense of living in a 'mean world' of violence and danger. Fearful people are more dependent, more easily manipulated and controlled, more susceptible to deceptively simple, strong, tough measures and hard-line postures.... They may accept and even welcome repression if it promises to relieve their insecurities. That is the deeper problem of violence-laden television."He taught at Temple University, Villanova University, and the University of Pennsylvania. After leaving Penn in 1990, he founded the Cultural Environment movement, an advocacy group promoting greater diversity in communication media.Gerbner was diagnosed with cancer in late November, 2005, and died on December 24, 2005 at his apartment in Center City, Philadelphia.
Between 2010 and 2014, a conference on communication, conflict, and aggression was held periodically in Budapest in honor of the late Dr. Gerbner. The conference was co-organized by Dr. Jolán Róka of Budapest Metropolitan University and Dr. Rebecca M. Chory, currently of Frostburg State University.