Moscow (, in US mainly: ; Russian: Москва, tr. Moskva, IPA: [mɐˈskva] (listen)) is the capital and most populous city of Russia. With over 12.5 million residents living within the city limits of 2,511 square kilometres (970 sq mi) as of 2018, Moscow is among the world's largest cities, being the second-most populous city in Europe, the most populous city entirely within Europe, and also the largest city (by area) on the European continent.Moscow has one of the world's largest urban economies, being ranked as an alpha global city, and is also one of the fastest growing tourist destinations in the world. Moscow is home to the third-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world, and has the highest number of billionaires of any city in Europe. Situated on the Moskva River in the Central Federal District of Western Russia, the city is the northernmost and coldest megacity on Earth. With a history that dates over eight centuries, Moscow is governed as a federal city that serves as the political, economic, cultural, and scientific centre of Russia and Eastern Europe.
Originally established in 1147 as a minor town, Moscow grew to become a prosperous and powerful city that served as the capital of the Grand Duchy that bears its namesake. When the Grand Duchy of Moscow evolved into the Tsardom of Russia, Moscow still remained as the political and economic center for most of the Tsardom's history. When the Tsardom was reformed into the Russian Empire, the capital was moved from Moscow to Saint Petersburg, diminishing the influence of the city. The capital was then moved back to Moscow following the Russian Revolution and the city was brought back as the political centre of the Soviet Russia and the USSR. When the USSR dissolved, Moscow remained as the capital city of the contemporary and newly-established Russian Federation.
As the cultural centre of Russia, Moscow served as the home of Russian artists, scientists, and sports figures due to the presence of its numerous museums, academic and political institutions and theatres. The city is home to several UNESCO World Heritage Sites, and is well known for its display of Russian architecture such as the Saint Basil's Cathedral, the Red Square, and the Moscow Kremlin, of which the latter serves as the seat of power of the Government of Russia. Moscow is home to many Russian companies in numerous industries, such as finance and technology. Moscow is served by a comprehensive transit network, which includes four international airports, nine railway terminals, a tram system, a monorail system, and most notably the Moscow Metro – the busiest metro system in Europe, and one of the largest rapid transit systems in the world.