Brendan O'Brien (born June 30, 1960) is a record producer, mixer, engineer, and musician. He has worked with such artists as Stone Temple Pilots, The Wallflowers, Pearl Jam, Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Bruce Springsteen, AC/DC, Aerosmith, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Zucchero Fornaciari, Soundgarden, Audioslave, Rage Against the Machine, The Black Crowes, Incubus, Train, The Killers, Seether, Kansas, King's X, The Offspring, Korn, The Fray, Wolfmother, Gaslight Anthem, Mastodon, Third Day, Lifehouse, Pantera, and My Chemical Romance.His career blossomed as a young guitarist with a local Atlanta band by the name of Pranks, signed by what was then Century Artists Management. The management company had the best of Atlanta and the region in those days, including the likes of Mother's Finest, Ezra Pound and a dozen other "super-regional" acts. In the late 1970s, he moved on to writing, performing and recording with the band Samurai Catfish.
Having become a notable local engineer known to be the go-to guy to "make a record in a few days for $1500." His studio career was propelled by the success of the first Black Crowes album, Shake Your Money Maker, which he engineered and performed guitar, bass, and "a potpourri of instruments" for.  The following year he produced and mixed Stone Temple Pilots debut album Core and engineered and mixed Red Hot Chili Peppers breakthrough album Blood Sugar Sex Magik. These two records launched his career as an in-demand, multi-platinum producer, engineer and mixer. He would go on to produce and mix nearly the entire catalog of Stone Temple Pilots and Pearl Jam. Most of his productions were engineered by Nick DiDia, who he worked with throughout most of his career.
Brendan would often engineer and record his own sessions with the help of various assistant engineers. A majority of the records that he produced and/or mixed were made at Southern Tracks Recording Studio near his home in Atlanta, GA from the late 80s until it closed.
In the mid 1990s, O'Brien became vice president of Epic Records and the Epic imprint 57 Records. He also played a Hammond organ for Bob Dylan's appearance on MTV Unplugged. In 1995, he joined Pearl Jam and Neil Young on keyboard for the Mirror Ball tour across Europe.In 2002, he won a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album for his work on Bruce Springsteen's The Rising. In 2009, he was awarded the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical. To date, 14 of the albums O'Brien has produced have reached No. 1 in the U.S. on the Billboard 200 chart.In 2015 he produced Higher Truth, the final release by Chris Cornell.
In 2016 he produced the Italian bluesman Zucchero Fornaciari's album Black Cat.
In 2017 O'Brien received credits producing on track three of the EP Cold Dark Place by progressive metal band Mastodon.