West Germany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG; German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, BRD; (listen) and retrospectively designated the Bonn Republic, was a state that existed between its formation on 23 May 1949 and German reunification on 3 October 1990. During this Cold War period, the western portion of Germany was part of the Western Bloc. The FRG was created during the Allied occupation of Germany after World War II, established from eleven states formed in the three Allied zones of occupation held by the United States, the United Kingdom and France. Its capital was the city of Bonn.
At the onset of the Cold War, Europe was divided among the Western and Eastern blocs. Germany was de facto divided into two countries and two special territories, the Saarland and a divided Berlin. Initially, the FRG claimed an exclusive mandate for all of Germany, considering itself to be the sole democratically reorganised continuation of the 1871–1945 German Reich. It took the line that the German Democratic Republic (GDR), commonly referred to as East Germany, was an illegally constituted puppet state. Although the GDR did hold regular elections, these were neither free nor fair and West Germany considered it to be illegitimate.
Three southwestern states of West Germany merged to form Baden-Württemberg in 1952 and the Saarland joined the FRG in 1957. In addition to the resulting ten states, West Berlin was considered a de facto eleventh state. While legally not part of the FRG as Berlin was under the control of the Allied Control Council, West Berlin politically aligned itself with West Germany and was directly or indirectly represented in its federal institutions. The foundation for the influential position held by Germany today was laid during the economic miracle of the 1950s (Wirtschaftswunder) when West Germany rose from the enormous destruction wrought by World War II to become the world's third-largest economy. The first chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who remained in office until 1963, had worked for a full alignment with NATO rather than neutrality. He not only secured a membership in NATO but was also a proponent of agreements which developed into the present-day European Union. When the G6 was established in 1975, there was no question as to whether West Germany would become a member.
Following the collapse of communism in Central and Eastern Europe in 1989, symbolised by the opening of the Berlin Wall, there was a rapid move towards German reunification. East Germany voted to dissolve itself and accede to the FRG in 1990. Its five post-war states (Länder) were reconstituted along with the reunited Berlin, which ended its special status and formed an additional Land. They formally joined the FRG on 3 October 1990, raising the number of states from ten to sixteen, ending the division of Germany. The reunion did not result in a new country as the process was essentially a voluntary act of accession, whereby West Germany was enlarged to include the additional states of East Germany which had ceased to exist. The expanded FRG retained West Germany's political culture and continued its existing memberships in international organisations as well as its Western foreign policy alignment and affiliation to Western alliances like the United Nations, NATO, OECD and the European Union.