Politics (Greek: Πολιτικά,
politiká, 'affairs of the cities') is the set of activities that are associated with the governance of a country, state or area. It involves making decisions that apply to groups of members and achieving and exercising positions of governance—organized control over a human community. The academic study of politics is referred to as political science.
In modern nation states, people often form political parties to represent their ideas. Members of a party often agree to take the same position on many issues and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders. An election is usually a competition between different parties. Examples of political parties worldwide include: the African National Congress (ANC) in South Africa; the Democratic Party (D) in the United States; the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom; the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) in Germany; and the Indian National Congress in India, which has the highest number of political parties in the world (2,546 political parties).Politics is a multifaceted word. It has a set of fairly specific meanings that are descriptive and nonjudgmental (e.g. "the art or science of government" and "political principles"), but does often colloquially carry a negative connotation. The word has been used negatively for many years: the British national anthem, as published in 1745, calls on God to "confound their politics," while the phrase "play politics," for example, has been in use since at least 1853, when abolitionist Wendell Phillips declared that "we do not play politics; anti-slavery is no half-jest with us."A variety of methods are deployed in politics, which include promoting one's own political views among people, negotiation with other political subjects, making laws, and exercising force, including warfare against adversaries. Politics is exercised on a wide range of social levels, from clans and tribes of traditional societies, through modern local governments, companies and institutions up to sovereign states, to the international level. During the past decade two tendencies made it possible to overlook comparative politics: 1. concern for theoretical explication and methodological rigor; and 2. the emphasis on field studies of the “emerging,” “new,” and “non-Western” nations.A political system is a framework which defines acceptable political methods within a society. The history of political thought can be traced back to early antiquity, with seminal works such as Plato's Republic, Aristotle's Politics, Chanakya's Arthashastra and Chanakya Niti (3rd Century BCE), as well as the works of Confucius.