The KLF (also known as The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu, The JAMs, The Timelords and other names) were one of the seminal bands of the British acid house movement during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Beginning in 1987, Bill Drummond (alias King Boy D) and Jimmy Cauty (alias Rockman Rock) released hip hop-inspired and sample-heavy records as The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu. As the Timelords, they recorded the British number one hit single "Doctorin' the Tardis" and documented the process of making a hit record in a book, The Manual (How to Have a Number One the Easy Way). As The KLF, Drummond and Cauty pioneered "stadium house" and "ambient house". The KLF released a series of international hits on their own KLF Communications record label and became the biggest-selling singles act in the world in 1991.
From the outset, they adopted the philosophy espoused by esoteric novels The Illuminatus! Trilogy, making anarchic situationist manifestations, including the defacement of billboard adverts, the posting of cryptic advertisements in NME magazine and the mainstream press, and unusual performances on Top of the Pops. In collaboration with Extreme Noise Terror at the BRIT Awards in February 1992, they fired machine gun blanks into the audience and dumped a dead sheep at the aftershow party. This performance pre-announced The KLF's departure from the music business and, in May of that year, they deleted their entire back catalogue.
With The KLF's profits, Drummond and Cauty established the K Foundation and sought to subvert the art world, staging an alternative art award for the Worst Artist of The Year and burning one million pounds sterling.
Although Drummond and Cauty remained true to their word of May 1992 – the KLF Communications catalogue remains deleted in the UK – they have released a small number of new tracks since then, as the K Foundation, The One World Orchestra and most recently, in 1997, as 2K. The duo reappeared in 2017 as The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu, releasing a novel – 2023 – and rebooting an earlier campaign to build a "People's Pyramid".