Steven Arnold King (born May 28, 1949) is an American politician and former businessman, serving as a U.S. Representative from Iowa since 2003. A member of the Republican Party, he represented Iowa's 5th congressional district until 2013, when redistricting renumbered it the 4th. This district is in northwestern Iowa and includes Sioux City.
Born in 1949 in Storm Lake, Iowa, King attended Northwest Missouri State University from 1967 to 1970 and majored in biology and mathematics, leaving the school without graduating. He founded a construction company in 1975 and worked in business and environmental study before seeking the Republican nomination for a seat in the Iowa Senate in 1996. He won the primary and the general election, and was reelected in 2000. In 2002 King was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Iowa's 5th congressional district after the incumbent, Tom Latham, was reassigned to the 4th district after redistricting. He was reelected four times before the 2010 United States Census removed the 5th district and placed King in the 4th, which he has represented since 2013.
King is an opponent of immigration and multiculturalism, and has a long history of racist and anti-immigrant rhetoric and white-nationalist affiliations. The Washington Post described King as the "Congressman most openly affiliated with white nationalism." King has spoken favorably of white supremacist ideas and made controversial statements against Jews, African Americans, Latinos and immigrants, and has supported European right-wing populist and far-right politicians accused of racism and Islamophobia.For much of King's congressional tenure, Republican Party politicians and officials were silent about his rhetoric, and frequently sought his endorsement and campaigned with him because of King's popularity with northwest Iowa's conservative voters. Shortly before the 2018 election, the National Republican Congressional Committee  withdrew funding for King's reelection campaign and its chairman, Steve Stivers, condemned King's conduct, although Iowa's Republican senators and governor continued to endorse him. King was reelected, but after a January 2019 interview in which he questioned the negative connotations of the terms "white nationalist" and "white supremacy", he was widely condemned by both parties, the media and public figures, and the Republican Steering Committee removed him from all House committee assignments.