The Saturdays are an English girl group based in London, England. The group formed during the summer of 2007 and have been on hiatus since 2014. The lineup consists of Frankie Bridge, Una Healy, Rochelle Humes, Mollie King, and Vanessa White. They were formed through Fascination Records, a sub-division of Polydor Records, who gave them an instant record deal with the label. As soon as the contract was finalised, the Saturdays went on tour with Girls Aloud during their Tangled Up Tour. The group's music style is pop, however throughout their career their management have experimented with dance-pop and electropop. Throughout their career, songwriters and producers Ina Wroldsen, Steve Mac, Camille Purcell, and Quiz & Larossi have been heavily involved to help create their music.
In July 2008, the Saturdays released their debut single, "If This Is Love", which resulted in the group achieving their first top ten hit. They released their debut album, Chasing Lights, in 2008 and charted at number nine on the UK Albums Chart. It was accredited platinum certification by the BPI and also produced three more top ten singles—"Up", "Issues", and "Just Can't Get Enough". "Work" was also released from the album. The group's first concert tour, The Work Tour, took place in 2009. Wordshaker was released as the group's second album and produced top 10 hits—"Forever Is Over" and "Ego". After the release of "Ego", The Saturdays decided to release their first mini album in 2010, Headlines!, which also produced top 10 hits—"Missing You" and "Higher", which featured guest vocals from Flo Rida. The Headlines Tour was the group's second concert tour. Their third album, On Your Radar, was released in 2011 and saw the release of two top 10 singles—"Notorious" and "All Fired Up".
In December 2011, the group took to their first arena tour, All Fired Up! Live. "30 Days" was released as the first single from their fourth album and charted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart. "What About Us" was released as the follow-up single from the album and became The Saturdays' first number-one single on the UK singles chart, selling 114,000 copies in the first week of release. "Gentleman" followed as the next single. "Disco Love", which went straight in at number five on the official UK charts, became their thirteenth top ten hit. Their fourth studio album, Living for the Weekend, debuted at number ten on 20 October 2013, becoming their fourth top 10 album. The Saturdays released their first greatest hits album, Finest Selection: The Greatest Hits, on 11 August 2014. It was preceded by a single, "What Are You Waiting For?", which was available to download on 9 August 2014. The Saturdays embarked on their Greatest Hits Live! tour in September 2014.
The Saturdays have sold over 8 million records in the UK and Ireland. It was estimated the group had earned £18.4 million during their existence.