Jörg Fischer (born 4 July 1957) is a German guitar player, primarily known for his work with the band Accept.  He joined the band towards the end of the recording of their self-titled debut album and plays on the albums I'm a Rebel and Breaker until leaving before the recording of the fourth album Restless and Wild. After the recording of Balls to the Wall was completed he was asked to rejoin the band. Fischer appears on the albums Metal Heart and Russian Roulette. By this time his role had diminished mainly to rhythm guitarist, although featured on lead guitar on the songs "Living for Tonite", "Wrong Is Right', "Aiming High", "Another Second to Be" and "Lay Down the Law" (performed by Accept on UDO's Animal House album). Fischer left the band again around 1988.
Fischer next turned up in a short-lived Los Angeles-based project named Royal Flush which also featured vocalist Dave Fefolt (Masi, Hawk), guitarist Roy Z (Tribe of Gypsies, Bruce Dickinson), bassist Rex Tennyson (Hellion, Heavy Bones), and drummer Reynold Carlson (Jag Panzer, Joey Tafolla); the band broke up after recording a 5-song demo with producer Dieter Dierks.
On the heels of Royal Flush, Fischer teamed up with all Swedish musicians, vocalist Pete Sandberg (ex-Alien, Von Rosen), bassist Magnus Rosén (ex-Von Rosen), drummer Anders Johansson (ex-Yngwie Malmsteen, Silver Mountain), and keyboardist Jens Johansson (ex-Yngwie Malmsteen, Silver Mountain) under the name Goodnight L.A.. Although the band landed a development deal with RCA Records things went no further and the whole line-up decamped to Sweden where they performed as the Coverboys, with Per Stadin (ex-Silver Mountain) replacing Rosén on bass, a short lived cover band formed in 1991 for a summer tour of Sweden and Norway.
Fischer recorded the album Something Wicked Comes with the band Billionaires Boys Club in 1993. Billionaire Boys Club featured Fischer on guitar, Anders Johansson on drums, Magnus Rosén on bass, and Mark Boals (ex-Yngwie Malmsteen) on vocals. Marcel Jacob (ex-Talisman, Last Autumn's Dream) shared additional bass guitar duties on the album along with Per Stadin.
Since the demise of Billionaires Boys Club Fischer has kept a low profile but resurfaced briefly with Doom Squad, a one-off studio collaboration featuring members of Anthrax, Armored Saint and Ugly Kid Joe, recording a cover of "Burnin' Up" for the album A Tribute to Judas Priest: Legends of Metal, issued in 1996.