Selena Marie Gomez (born July 22, 1992) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and television producer. After appearing on the children's television series Barney & Friends (2002–2004), she received wider recognition for her portrayal of Alex Russo on the Emmy Award-winning Disney Channel television series Wizards of Waverly Place (2007–2012). From 2008 to 2011, Gomez also starred in the films Another Cinderella Story, Princess Protection Program, Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie, Ramona and Beezus, and Monte Carlo. Thereafter, she focused on more mature roles since 2012, with Spring Breakers, Getaway, The Fundamentals of Caring, and The Dead Don't Die. She voices the character of Mavis in the Hotel Transylvania film franchise, and serves as an executive producer of the Netflix television drama series 13 Reasons Why (2017–present) and the Netflix documentary series Living Undocumented (2019).
With her former band Selena Gomez & the Scene, she released three studio albums that attained gold certifications and reached the top ten in the US. She debuted as a solo artist on the pop and dance influenced Stars Dance (2013), which became her first number-one album on the US Billboard 200, and included her first top-ten single on the Billboard Hot 100, "Come & Get It". To finish out her contract with Hollywood Records, she released a compilation album in 2014, which included her second top-ten single "The Heart Wants What It Wants". Released via Interscope Records, her second studio album Revival (2015) topped the Billboard 200 with the highest first week sales of her career. It was well-received by music critics and became Gomez's first to achieve platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The first three singles, "Good for You", "Same Old Love", and "Hands to Myself", all became top-ten entries on the Hot 100, and topped the Mainstream Top 40 chart. Since then, she was featured on several collaborations, including "We Don't Talk Anymore" with Charlie Puth, "It Ain't Me" with Kygo, "Wolves" with Marshmello, and "Taki Taki" with DJ Snake. After a short absence from the music scene, Gomez released "Lose You to Love Me", her first US number one single, from her third consecutive number-one album Rare (2020).
In 2017, Billboard reported that Gomez has sold over 7 million albums and 22 million singles worldwide. Gomez has earned numerous awards throughout her career, and was recognized as the Billboard Woman of the Year in 2017. She has a large following on social media, and was at one time the most followed individual on Instagram, before being surpassed by athlete Cristiano Ronaldo. Gomez's other ventures include a makeup line, a clothing line, a handbag line, a fragrance line, and a production company named July Moonhead Productions. She has worked with various charitable organizations and became a UNICEF ambassador at the age of seventeen.