The Katholieke Universiteit LeuvenA (in English: Catholic University of Leuven),B abbreviated KU Leuven, is a research university in the Dutch-speaking town of Leuven in Flanders, Belgium, founded in 1834 in Mechelen as the Catholic University of Belgium and moved its seat to the town of Leuven in 1835 where it changed its name to Catholic University of Leuven. KU Leuven considers itself to be the continuation of the Studium Generale Lovaniense established in 1425 and suppressed in 1797 under French rule.It conducts teaching, research, and services in the natural sciences, engineering, humanities, medicine, law, and social sciences.KU Leuven consistently ranks among the top 100 universities in the world by five major ranking tables. As of 2020, it ranks 85th according the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities, 52nd according to the CWTS Leiden Ranking, 45th globally according to Times Higher Education, 56th according U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges Ranking and 80th according QS World University Rankings. For four consecutive years starting in 2016, Thomson Reuters ranked KU Leuven as Europe's most innovative university, with its researchers having filed more patents than any other university in Europe; its patents are also the most cited by external academics. A number of its programs rank within the top 100 in the world according to QS World University Rankings by Subject.
In addition to its main campus in Leuven, it has satellite campuses in Kortrijk, Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges, Ostend, Geel, Diepenbeek, Aalst, Sint-Katelijne-Waver, and in Belgium's capital Brussels. KU Leuven is the largest university in Belgium and the Low Countries. In 2017-18, more than 58,000 students were enrolled. Its primary language of instruction is Dutch, although several programs are taught in English, particularly graduate degrees.The old University of Leuven was founded at the center of the historic town of Leuven in 1425, making it Belgium's first university.
Once formally integrated into the French Republic, a law dating to 1793 mandating that all universities in France be closed came into effect. The University of Leuven was abolished by decree of the Département of the Dyle on October 25, 1797.The new Catholic University of Leuven was "founded" in 1834, and is frequently (but controversially) identified as a continuation of the older institution.C In 1968, the Catholic University of Leuven split into the Dutch-language Katholieke Universiteit te Leuven and the French-language Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain), which moved to Louvain-la-Neuve in Wallonia and Brussels. Historically, the Catholic University of Leuven has been a major contributor to the development of Catholic theology. It is considered the oldest extant Catholic university. Although Catholic in heritage, it operates independently from the Church. KU Leuven is open to students from different faiths.