Serbia and Montenegro (Serbian: Србија и Црна Гора / Srbija i Crna Gora, SCG), officially the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (Државна Заједница Србија и Црна Гора / Državna Zajednica Srbija i Crna Gora), was a country in Southeast Europe. It was created from the two remaining republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia after its breakup in 1992.
From its creation to 2003, when it transitioned from a formal federation to a loose confederacy, the country was known as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Савезна Република Југославија / Savezna Republika Jugoslavia), referred to colloquially as FR Yugoslavia or simply Yugoslavia.
For the first several years of its existence, the state aspired to be recognized as the sole legal successor to Yugoslavia, but those claims were opposed by other former constituent republics. The United Nations also denied its request to take up Yugoslavia's membership. Eventually, after the overthrow of Slobodan Milošević from power as president of the federation in 2000, the country rescinded those aspirations and accepted the opinion of the Badinter Arbitration Committee about shared succession. It re-applied for UN membership on 27 October 2000 and was admitted on 1 November.The FRY was initially dominated by Slobodan Milošević as President of Serbia (1989–1997) and then President of Yugoslavia (1997–2000). Milošević installed and forced the removal of several federal presidents (such as Dobrica Ćosić) and prime ministers (such as Milan Panić). However, the Montenegrin government, initially enthusiastic supporters of Milošević, started gradually distancing themselves from his policies. That culminated in regime change in 1996, when his former ally Milo Đukanović reversed his policies, became leader of Montenegro's ruling party and subsequently dismissed former Montenegrin leader Momir Bulatović, who remained loyal to the Milošević government. As Bulatović was given central positions in Belgrade from that time (as federal Prime Minister), Đukanović continued to govern Montenegro and further isolated it from Serbia. Thus from 1996 to 2006 Montenegro and Serbia were only nominally part of the same country as governance at every feasible level was conducted locally, in Belgrade for Serbia and in Podgorica for Montenegro.
As a loose union or confederacy, Montenegro and Serbia were united only in certain realms, such as defense and sports. The two constituent republics functioned separately throughout the period of the Federal Republic, and continued to operate under separate economic policies, as well as using separate currencies (the euro was the only legal tender in Montenegro). On 21 May 2006, the Montenegrin independence referendum was held, in which 55.5% of voters voted in favor of independence. The last vestiges of the former Yugoslavia, 88 years after its creation, came to an end upon Montenegro's formal declaration of independence on 3 June 2006, and Serbia's formal declaration of independence on 5 June. After the dissolution, Serbia became the legal successor of the union, while the newly independent Montenegro re-applied for membership in international organisations.