The Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism is the journalism school of Columbia University. It is located in Pulitzer Hall on Columbia's Morningside Heights campus in New York City.
Founded in 1912 by Joseph Pulitzer, Columbia Journalism School is the only journalism school in the Ivy League and one of the oldest in the world. It offers four degree programs: 1) master of science; 2) master of arts; 3) a variety of dual degrees, including a master of science in journalism and computer science; and 4) a doctor of philosophy in communications.
The school houses the Pulitzer Prizes, arguably journalism's most prestigious award. It also directly administers several other prizes, including the Alfred I. duPont–Columbia University Award, honoring excellence in broadcast and digital journalism in the public service. It co-sponsors the National Magazine Awards, also known as the Ellie Awards, and publishes the Columbia Journalism Review, a widely respected voice on press criticism since 1961.
In addition to offering professional development programs, fellowships and workshops, the school is home to the Tow Center for Digital Journalism, which "examines digital journalism's industry-wide economic trends, its cultural shifts, and its relationship with the broader, constantly changing world of technology," and the Brown Institute for Media Innovation, "a collaboration between Columbia University and Stanford University, designed to encourage and support new endeavors in media innovation," particularly the incorporation of new tools and technologies in journalistic storytelling in the digital age. The school is also home to the Dart Center for Journalism and Trauma, "a resource center and global network of journalists, journalism educators and health professionals dedicated to improving media coverage of trauma, conflict and tragedy."  Unfortunately, the Brown Institute's Board of Advisors is heavily weighted with representatives from the Hearst Media Group and financial investors.
Admission to the school is highly selective and has traditionally drawn a very international student body. A faculty of experienced professionals preeminent in their respective fields, including politics, arts and culture, religion, science, education, business and economics, investigative reporting, and national and international affairs, instruct students. A Board of Visitors meets periodically to advise the dean's office and support the school's initiatives.