Clifford Bundy Stearns Sr. (born April 16, 1941) is an American businessman and politician who was the U.S. Representative for Florida's 6th congressional district from 1989 to 2013. He is a member of the Republican Party.
On August 14, 2012, Stearns lost to veterinarian Ted Yoho in a four-way Republican primary by about 1 percent of the vote.  Due to redistricting every 10 years, Stearns ran in a new district that did not include his hometown and one of his staunch bases of support.  After the primary election, Stearns called Yoho to congratulate him and Yoho described Stearns as "classy" and "humble" in his remarks.During the Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida in August, the Florida delegation honored Stearns and his service with a standing ovation and speakers talked about his record of accomplishments and the loss to the state of a leader with so much seniority in Congress.In 2012, Stearns donated a collection of his papers to The George Washington University.  The collection largely consists of his committee work, but also includes personal and political correspondence, briefing books, and travel agendas.  The collection is currently under the care of GW's Special Collections Research Center, located in the Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library.While a Member of Congress, Stearns received the Air Force Association W. Stuart Symington Award, the highest honor presented to a civilian in the field of national security for his work in behalf of the United States Air Force.Since leaving the United States Congress after 24 years, he is employed with APCO Worldwide which is a communications and public relations firm headquartered in Washington D.C. Stearns is also a member of APCO Worldwide International Advisory Council (IAC) which comprises more than 70 recognized global leaders including former elected politicians who advise clients on complex issues.  In addition, he is on three boards namely, The Graduate School of Political Management at The George Washington University, Minority Media & Telecom Council and the United States Association of Former Members of Congress.