James Oldaker (born September 5, 1951 in Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States) is an American rock music, blues rock and country music drummer and percussionist. He is an exponent of the shuffle style. He is married to Mary Billings Oldaker.
One of the first bands that Oldaker was a member of in 1965 was called The Rogues Five. The Rogues Five saw regional success and opened for other more popular bands such as The Doors at the Tulsa Convention Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Oldaker and The Rogues Five were a regular band on KOTV’s popular teen dance show “Dance Party.” After a stint in Bob Seger's band (on the album Back in '72), Oldaker joined Eric Clapton in 1974 during the recording of 461 Ocean Boulevard. Oldaker tells an interesting story about how he first heard the song I Shot The Sheriff after it was released. Oldaker remained a member of Clapton's studio and touring bands through 1979, when the entire band was dismissed. Oldaker would return to the Clapton band in 1983, playing on Clapton's moderately successful Behind the Sun album, released in 1985, and performing with Clapton at Live Aid that same year, before leaving in 1986. Oldaker appears on the blues side of the live recording 24 Nights from 1990 and 1991. Not long after leaving Clapton's band, Oldaker briefly became a member of Kiss guitarist Ace Frehley's project, Frehley's Comet, appearing on the 1988 album Second Sighting.  He is a former member of the alt.country band The Tractors.Oldaker has also recorded with musicians such as The Bellamy Brothers, Asleep at the Wheel, Peter Frampton, Stephen Stills, Leon Russell, Ace Frehley, Freddie King, and The Bee Gees.In August, 2005, Oldaker released Mad Dogs & Okies on Concord Records, a collection of tunes celebrating the music and musicians of Oklahoma, which he produced. Collaborators include Eric Clapton, Vince Gill, J. J. Cale, Willie Nelson, Ronnie Dunn, Bonnie Bramlett, and Joe and Ellen. It will be accompanied by a companion film project.Jamie is currently involved in working with the organizers and the building of the OKPOP museum in Tulsa, OK.  He and his wife, Mary, are also hosts to an annual fundraiser, MOJO Fest, to raise money for the Tulsa Day Center for the Homeless, a cause they are very passionate about.