Thomas C. Hauser (born 27 February 1946 in New York City, United States) is an American author.
He made his debut as a writer in 1978 with The Execution of Charles Horman: An American Sacrifice. Horman's wife, Joyce Horman, and his parents, Edmund and Elizabeth Horman, cooperated with Hauser on the book describing both the fate of Charles and his family's quest to uncover the truth in Chile. It was adapted as Costa-Gavras's film Missing, starring Jack Lemmon and Sissy Spacek. A later book by Hauser - Final Warning: The Legacy of Chernoby (co-authored with Dr. Robert Gale) served as the basis for the film Chernobyl starring Jon Voight and Jason Robards.
In 1981, Hauser published a novel, Ashworth & Palmer, set in a fictional law firm, which was inspired by his experience as an associate at Cravath, Swaine & Moore from 1971 through 1977, following his graduation from Columbia Law School in 1970. Later novels recreated the lives of Beethoven, Mark Twain, and Charles Dickens. 
Hauser also wrote Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times, a biography of boxer Muhammad Ali. The book was nominated for the National Book Award. In 1991 he was awarded the William Hill Sports Book of the Year award for Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times. More recently, Hauser authored Muhammad Ali: A Tribute to the Greatest. 
He is a keen follower of boxing and has written about the sport for numerous print publications such as the New York Times and The Ring and various websites such as The Sweet Science,[2] and Boxing Scene.[3]
On eight occasions, articles written by Hauser have been named "best investigative writing" of the year by the Boxing Writers Association of America. In 2004, the organization honored him with the Nat Fleischer Award for Career Excellence in Boxing Journalism. Since 2012, he has been a consultant to HBO Sports. In 2003, at the request of the late Senator John McCain, Hauser testified before the United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation regarding the regulation of professional boxing.

