The Liberal Democrats (Lib Dems) are a liberal political party in the United Kingdom. The party currently has 11 Members of Parliament in the House of Commons, 91 members of the House of Lords, five Members of the Scottish Parliament and one member in each of the Welsh Assembly and the London Assembly. It formed a coalition government of the United Kingdom with the Conservative Party from 2010–15. It is also currently in coalition with the Labour Party in the devolved Welsh government, and has also formed coalitions with the Labour Party in Scotland.
In 1981, an electoral alliance was established between the Liberal Party, a group which was the direct descendant of the 18th-century Whigs, and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), a splinter group from the Labour Party. In 1988, the parties merged as the Social and Liberal Democrats, adopting their present name over a year later. Under the leadership of Paddy Ashdown and later Charles Kennedy, the party grew during the 1990s and 2000s, focusing its campaigns on specific seats and becoming the third-largest party in the House of Commons. Under the leadership of Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrats were junior partners in David Cameron's Conservative-led coalition government in which Clegg served as Deputy Prime Minister. Although it allowed them to implement some of their policies, the coalition damaged the Liberal Democrats' electoral prospects and it suffered heavy losses at the 2015 general election. Since then, under the leaderships of Tim Farron, Sir Vince Cable and Jo Swinson, it has refocused itself as a party opposing Brexit.
Positioned in the centre ground of British politics, the Liberal Democrats ideologically draw upon both liberalism and social democracy. Different factions have dominated the party at different points in its history, each with its own ideological bent, some leaning towards the centre-left and others the centre-right. The party calls for constitutional reform, including a transition from the first-past-the-post voting system to proportional representation. Emphasising stronger protections for civil liberties, the party promotes socially liberal approaches to issues like LGBT rights, drug liberalisation, education policy, and criminal justice. It favours a market-based economy supplemented with social welfare spending. The party is internationalist and pro-European, supporting a People's Vote for the continued UK membership of the European Union and greater European integration; it previously called for adoption of the euro currency. The Lib Dems have promoted further environmental protections and opposed certain UK military engagements like the Iraq War.
The Liberal Democrats are historically strongest in northern Scotland, south-west London, south-west England and mid-Wales. Membership is primarily middle-class and more heavily university educated than most UK parties. The party's partner in Northern Ireland is the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland. Internationally, the party is a member of the Liberal International and Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe, with its MEPs affiliated to the Renew Europe group in the European Parliament.