Bella Fromm (20 December 1890 – 9 February 1972) was a German journalist and author of Jewish origin, who lived in exile in the United States from 1938. She is best known as the author of Blood and Banquets (1943), an account of her time as diplomatic correspondent for Berlin newspapers during the Weimar Republic, and of her experiences during the first five years of the Third Reich. Although this book was published as an authentic contemporary diary, and is frequently cited as such, recent research suggests that Fromm wrote it in the U.S. after leaving Germany.
Fromm was born to Her father Siegfried Fromm and her mother Greta Fromm is a sister of Max Fromm the sons of Nathan and Marie Fromm in Nuremberg and grew up in Kitzingen in Lower Franconia, part of a family of prosperous assimilated Jewish wine merchants. The Fromm family came from Spain and lived for 500 years until the Holocaust in Germany. By her own account, her family was on friendly terms with the Bavarian royal family and other leaders of Bavarian high society. Her father died when she was a child, and her mother, to whom she was devoted, died in 1918. In 1911 she married a Jewish businessman, Max Israel, with whom she had a daughter, Grete-Ellen (known as “Gonny” in Fromm’s writing). After her divorce from Israel she married Karl Julius Steuermann, from whom she was also later divorced.
During World War I Fromm worked for the German Red Cross and was decorated by the King of Bavaria. After her mother’s death she inherited the family fortune and was able to devote her time to social work. The inflation of 1923, however, destroyed her wealth and she was forced to look for work. Using family contacts, she was employed by the Ullstein press, a major Jewish-owned publishing house, and worked for the Ullstein newspapers, notably the Berliner Zeitung (“BZ”) and the Vossische Zeitung, a leading Berlin liberal newspaper. Initially confined to traditional roles for female journalists such as fashion and social gossip, Fromm proved talented and ambitious and soon graduated to writing about politics and diplomacy.